E&amp;OE;…  
  
  
  
PRIME MINISTER:  
  
Today I first acknowledge the original inhabitants of the land on which we
meet, the people of the Kulin nation. I acknowledge and honour their elders
past and present. And those of all first Australians, and particularly today
those first Australians who have served and are serving Australia in our
Australian Defence Forces.  
  
Rear Admiral Ken Doolan AO RAN National President and Mrs Doolan, RSL National
CEO Sam Jackman, RSL Deputy President Robert Dick and Mrs Dick, Presidents of
the State and Territory RSL and other ex-service organisations, Leader of the
Opposition, the Honourable Bill Shorten, the Minister for Veterans’ Affairs,
the Honourable Dan Tehan and the Shadow Minister for Veterans’ Affairs, the
Honourable David Feeney.  
  
I would also acknowledge His Excellency the Governor General who opened the
proceedings earlier this morning.  
  
And also congratulate the winner of the ANZAC Peace Prize, Peter Greste, who
has spent 22 years covering conflicts across the world.  
  
Yesterday Admiral Doolan stood alongside Bill Shorten and me inside the Shrine
of Remembrance, as together we laid wreaths on the solemn commemoration of
this your centenary.  
  
The nation is united in its respect for you and your century of service to
veterans and their families.  
  
The Returned and Services League too has always sought to unite Australians
and their leaders in respecting and supporting our veterans.  
  
You remind us that our freedoms have been bought at a great price, that our
national interests must be effectively guarded and that in the words of your
wise motto, the price of liberty is eternal vigilance.  
  
And Admiral, as your predecessor Eric Millhouse added in 1949, “Let it be the
nation’s motto too.”  
  
That is doubly reinforced today as we remember the 3,000 Australians who
served in the Normandy landings 72 years ago, that epic turning point in World
War Two that delivered a mighty blow for freedom against the forces of fascism
and tyranny in Europe.  
  
The RSL’s motto resonates as strongly today as it did back in those dark days,
and is well heeded by my Government.  
  
We are embarking on the largest upgrade to our defence capabilities since
World War Two, so that we can keep Australia safe and secure in an uncertain
and complex world.  
  
We are renewing The Royal Australian Navy’s fleet on a scale not seen in
generations.  
  
This includes the construction in Australia of 12 regionally-superior
submarines, 9 Future Frigates, 12 Offshore Patrol Vessels, as well as 21
Pacific Patrol Boats for our island neighbours.  
  
The 2016 Defence White Paper sets out our plan to develop a more potent, agile
and engaged Australian Defence Force ready to respond whenever our interests
are threatened or our help is needed.  
  
At the Shrine yesterday, Admiral Doolan and I reflected on how the wisdom of
classical Greece had inspired its design and the way in which we remember and
honour those who defend our freedom.  
  
When I reflect on our commitment to a strong and capable Australian Defence
Force I am always reminded of another Admiral - Thucydides - who recorded the
words of the Athenian ambassadors nearly 2500 years ago as they sought to
bully a smaller city into submission.  
  
“You know as well as we do,” they said, that “justice, as the world goes, is
only in question between equals in power, while the strong do what they can
and the weak suffer as they must.”  
  
Sobering, chilling and timeless words, and a reminder that a safe Australia, a
safe world, needs a strong Australia.  
  
Governments honour your service in many ways. But there is none more important
than ensuring that Australia has the means to defend itself, so that freedoms
won by you are not lost through neglect or complacency.  
  
A strong defence force is critical to our ongoing national prosperity. That is
why we will ensure that our ADF personnel are always well trained, equipped
and supported to undertake the most challenging of roles.  
  
We ask our soldiers, sailors and airmen and airwomen to shoulder a heavy
burden for this country. We honour your service by ensuring that our
servicemen and women are well led, well-armed and well protected, so that they
can do their job of protecting us and most importantly, come home safe and
sound.  
  
And we honour your service by caring for the wounded, honouring the fallen and
caring for their families and never forgetting that the best way to honour the
heroes of World War One in this centenary is to support and care for the
heroes and veterans of today, you and your members and your families.  
  
It is fitting that we commemorate Australia’s involvement in the First World
War at the same time as we celebrate 100 years of the RSL.  
  
Our young nation had seen just two years of war when the RSL held its
inaugural Congress in Brisbane, in September 1916.  
  
First formed by returning soldiers, its aims were simple – to preserve the
spirit of mateship formed amidst the carnage and horror of battle; to honour
the memory of the fallen; and to help each other.  
  
We were a young nation and only five million in number.  
  
Admiral Doolan and I also reflected on this on the steps of the Shrine
yesterday - such a small nation, such extraordinary service - 417,000 out of
five million served; more than 60,000 died and another 156,000 wounded, gassed
or taken prisoner.  
  
Very few families did not have members who served. Nobody, no family was
untouched.  
  
Lucy’s grandfather Geoffrey Hughes was a fighter ace in the Royal Flying Corps
with eleven victories and a Military Cross.  
  
In December 1916, he learned that his brother Roger, a doctor, recently
arrived on the Western Front, had been wounded. He rushed to his side and was
with him when he died.  
  
My grandfather Fred Turnbull was an infantryman on the Western Front - a
private. We talked about many things Fred and I - fishing and carpentry,
politics and poetry - but he never talked to me about the trenches, and his
silence spoke volumes.  
  
Fred was gassed but survived, as Geoffrey did, to serve again in the Second
World War - the one that started 21 years after the end of the war to end all
wars.  
  
What a generation they were!  
  
The names of the diggers of The Great War are on monuments, in every town and
suburb, a faded inscription on weathered stone.  
  
But each and every one of their unique stories and those of their families are
the threads that form the tapestry of our war-time experience.  
  
From afar, this tapestry tells our national story. Up close, each thread tells
its own tale of courage, grief and sorrow.  
  
Australia in 1916 was a vastly different place. There were few welfare
services and the elderly, the sick and the unemployed were largely left to
fend for themselves.  
  
Veterans struggled to get help for their injuries and to return to civilian
life.  
  
And the hidden wounds – the psychological damage that remained unseen and
therefore untreated – affected both them and their families, sometimes for
generations. Even today, we are still learning how best to help those who
suffer from Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder.  
  
So these were the conditions our first veterans faced after serving their
country.  
  
Into the breach came the RSL and the spirit of comradeship, forged on the
battlefield, spread out across the nation into thousands of suburbs, streets
and homes touched by war.  
  
The League committed itself to provide for the sick, wounded and needy among
those who have served and their dependants, including pensions, medical
attention, homes and employment.  
  
It was instrumental in the creation of the medical repatriation system and the
introduction of service, disability and war widows’ pensions.  
  
In more recent years, the RSL has also helped us to better focus on
commemorative activities, including the Anzac Centenary.  
  
Many have remarked on the growing popularity of Anzac Day parades growing
attendances. But the memorials we build and the symbols we use to remember our
role in war says much about our country.  
  
We do not boast of our victories, because we know that they came at great
cost.  
  
When we remember war and honour those who serve we do so as a nation that
loves peace and is strong to ensure this peace is maintained.  
  
Last week’s repatriation ceremony struck a sombre and poignant note in the
midst of your centenary celebrations.  
  
Australia welcomed home the remains of 33 service personnel and dependents,
including 22 Vietnam War veterans from Terendak Military Cemetery in Malaysia,
and the Kranji Cemetery in Singapore.  
  
His Excellency, the Governor General, General Sir Peter Cosgrove, a Vietnam
veteran and recipient of the Military Cross himself, spoke for Australia when
he said at the repatriation ceremony:  
  
“They were serving Australia, whether in uniform or as part of families
engaged in such service…  
  
In all these years they have been cared for so lovingly and respectfully, but
out of sight, far from home.  
  
Although they have never been out of our minds, never far from our thoughts.  
  
They have stayed too in the minds of their determined, energetic and
persuasive comrades in arms and loved ones, who have been tireless in urging
their repatriation.  
  
And now they are with us and at one with all other veterans in modern times
who have in death, made the sad journey back to their homeland—Australia.”  
  
I pay tribute to the tireless efforts of the veterans and family members to
bring our soldiers home. What you have achieved through your perseverance
helps heal lingering wounds and for that, your nation is grateful.  
  
I also thank the former Minister for Veterans’ Affairs, Michael Ronaldson and
my predecessor as Prime Minister, Tony Abbott, for acknowledging that
repatriation of these soldiers was the right thing to do and for making it
happen.  
  
This year marks the 50th anniversary of the Battle of Long Tan, Australia’s
costliest day in the Vietnam War. We will commemorate it in Canberra on 17 and
18 August and a service will also be held at Enoggora Barracks in Queensland.  
  
When we look back at Australia’s treatment of veterans, the sad fact is that
our actions have not always matched the best of intentions.  
  
That is why the RSL is so important in the history of Australia’s defence
forces and their veterans and why your counsel is sought, including by our
Minister for Veterans’ Affairs, Dan Tehan.  
  
I want to reassure you that the Department of Veterans’ Affairs will continue
to look after veterans because you deserve your own department dedicated to
the special needs that come with being a returned serviceman or woman.  
  
Dan and I know well that understanding and treating mental illness is of
critical importance to you as indeed it is to us. The debilitating effect of
mental illness poses a great burden on us all.  
  
So we are streamlining eligibility to accessing mental health treatment early.
We know that early intervention is the key to more positive outcomes.  
  
That includes $37.9 million in the Federal Budget to extend eligibility for
treatment of certain mental health conditions to all current and former
permanent members of the ADF, irrespective of how long or when they served, or
the type of service.  
  
From 1 July—subject to the passage of legislation—anyone who has ever served
in the ADF permanent forces will be eligible for treatment for conditions such
as post-traumatic stress disorder, anxiety, depression, and alcohol and
substance use disorders.  
  
The Department will provide these individuals with a Department of Veterans’
Affairs White Health Card, which provides additional benefits, including
access to counselling from the Veterans and Veterans Families Counselling
Service.  
  
There is also $1 million for suicide awareness and prevention and $2.1 million
for a pilot program, Kookaburra Kids, to help children with a serving ADF
parent affected by mental illness.  
  
Given the significance of this issue, the Minister for Veterans’ Affairs and I
will have more to say shortly on early intervention strategies to treat mental
illness, including greater support for Australia’s growing female veteran
community.  
  
We also acknowledge the very serious issue of homelessness among veterans,
which is illustrated in the Queensland RSL’s recent report ‘A Place to Call
Home’.  
  
The causes of homelessness are complex, but recognised risk factors include
mental illness such as PTSD.  
  
I’ve asked Dan to gather state and territory ministers to ensure that
addressing homelessness among veterans is a priority in the next term of
Government.  
  
The Commonwealth will also require its agencies to identify whether clients
are veterans, to help us understand the extent of the problem and enable the
Department of Veterans’ Affairs and the RSL to work together to help them.  
  
We are also making changes to ease transition to civilian life. You have told
us about delays, complicated procedures and forms that make things harder.  
  
Funding in the budget will start updating DVA’s IT system to enable people to
connect online. This will help streamline services and reduce delays in
processing. But we will continue to cater for those who prefer to talk to
someone on the phone or behind a counter.  
  
Perhaps one of the most important things we can do for veterans injured during
their service is to support them back into the civilian workforce.  
  
We recognise the positive impact a job can have, how the sense of achievement
that having a job can assist in recovery from injury as well as in preventing
the development of mental illness.  
  
So I am pleased to announce today the Prime Minister’s Veterans’ Employment
Initiative, developing from discussions I have had with Soldier On CEO John
Bale and other veterans at North Bondi RSL and subsequently with John and Dan
Tehan in Canberra.  
  
Later this year John and I will host captains of industry in Sydney to
identify more effective ways to hire more veterans and their spouses in their
organisations. It will encourage employers to recognise the leadership and
skills veterans hold, regardless of their corps or rank and honour their
service to the nation.  
  
We believe Australians employers should be more aware of the important
leadership skills veterans have and the value that they offer to their
organisations. Improving promoting the employment of veterans is a key agenda
for us in our next term of government.  
  
We look forward to the closest collaboration with the RSL and other ex-service
organisations in coordinating our efforts to ensure more and better jobs for
more veterans.  
  
I am pleased at the work that has been done by DVA to support ill and injured
veterans back into the workforce and I note the success of a recent trial that
was undertaken with rehabilitation providers in Queensland.  
  
Lucy and I have been very impressed by, have supported and encouraged others
to support the work being done in the wider veteran community, through
organisations such as Soldier On and Mates4Mates, to help veterans from our
recent military deployments.  
  
Our son in law, James Brown, is an Iraq and Afghanistan veteran and I want to
thank James and his contemporaries, including John Bale, for giving us a very
close insight into the issues affecting the younger veterans of today and
their families.  
  
A centenary is an excellent time to look back on your history and your many
achievements, but also to look forward and plot a course ahead. I believe that
the RSL will best determine how its role will evolve into the future while
maintaining a firm and proud understanding of its proud history.  
  
As the RSL continues to evolve, what was admired of you as servicemen and
women will ensure that you will persevere, you will adapt, you will succeed.  
  
Your members served in different units, in different wars and at different
times. But each and every one of you, and your families, served to keep us
free.  
  
Your advocacy and commitment will always be respected and heeded as in the
past, today and in the future.  
  
Thank you.  
  
ENDS