have drawn down 46 per cent of its total available equity by June 2015 (when
the rollout is estimated to extend to only 10 to 12 per cent of premises).  
  
Several other operational areas continue to be of concern to the Government:  
  
● Integration of the various multi-technology access technologies and products
with NBN Co’s BSS/OSS systems has not yet been achieved. This is an area that
needs to be watched.  
  
● NBN Co’s customer ratings remain poor due to issues such as missed
appointments, lengthy waits for new service and inability to activate service
on the day.  
  
● There are question marks over BSS/OSS scalability and the scalability of
customer-facing functions such as service activation. Both need to ramp up to
four or five times current volumes by 2015-2016, as customer acquisition
accelerates.  
  
● There is no evidence FTTP or fixed wireless costs per premise are declining.  
  
● The timetables for finalising amendments to the Telstra DAs and the Optus
HFC agreement remain a risk, and may be complicated by adverse decisions from
the ACCC.  
  
Beyond execution risks, which could be thought of as tactical in nature, are
the structural risks I touched upon earlier which are more strategic - that
is, grounded in the changed industry structure and whole-sale only model of
NBN Co that accompany the rollout.  
  
The fundamental issue is that the NBN as conceived by Labor – a wholesale-only
open access network, built from scratch by a taxpayer-funded start-up,
offering a high basic service at uniform national prices, and committed to
burdensome financial obligations entered under Labor – is not able to earn
genuine commercial returns.  
  
While the financial projections in the Strategic Review assumed a much less
generous revenue outlook for NBN Co than Labor’s Corporate Plans, they still
indicated that if the project was built within the estimated budget envelope,
it would earn a positive return.  
  
Given the magnitude of the sums committed to by Labor under the DAs, however,
the economics are always going to be challenging. This is exacerbated by the
high cost of Labor’s non-FTTP capex commitments (especially to IT systems,
fixed wireless, transit and satellite) and the recent ‘discovery’ of more
users in regional Australia than originally forecast, all of whom have been
promised a 25 Megabit per second basic service. The more customers in these
areas, the harder it will become to deliver this service level without costs
blowing out.  
  
There are two final risks I want to briefly note.  
  
The first is around technology and competition. While fibre fanatics love to
scoff at anyone who dares suggest wireless will ever be competitive with fixed
line access, the work of Clay Christiansen tells us (if we had not worked it
out already) that often a ‘good-enough’ offering beats a technically more
advanced offering because of lower cost and greater convenience. Wireless may
prove a formidable competitor, perhaps sooner than expected – which speaks to
the value in avoiding laying too many costly FTTP fibre lead-ins to users who
don’t really need them.  
  
Of course wireless will also potentially present opportunities for NBN Co, if
it becomes a backhaul provider to owners of distributed small cell networks.  
  
Last of all, there are risks to the NBN from inflated political and public
expectations.  
  
Fast broadband provides very large benefits for the economy and society, but
it is a travesty that Labor deliberately conflated access to fast broadband
with fibre, and was so irresponsible in exaggerating the impact of the NBN on
people’s lives.  
  
Sometimes I fear that every mayor in Australia thinks the project will turn
their town into Silicon Valley. People with perfectly good broadband
connections today – for example over HFC - have been brainwashed to believe
that their world will be changed forever if they get fibre to the premises.  
  
Yet the truth is that for the 50 or 60 per cent or so of Australians with good
broadband today, the NBN will often be indistinguishable from what they
already have assuming their current line speeds are sufficient to run the
applications they need and value. They’ll wonder what all the fuss was about –
and why the NBN is costing so much and taking so long.  
  
Let me conclude on that sombre note. Bringing a sense of reality to a
beautiful dream is never going to invite popularity, and many people remain
incensed that we’ve killed that dream to save a mere $30 or $40 billion.  
  
On the other side of the argument are people who say the project should have
been shut down. Leaving aside the political dimension, we were satisfied that
the cost of shutting it down was at least $15 billion and likely quite a bit
more.  
  
But I’m confident that everything we’ve seen so far tells us the Coalition's
strategy is the right one and that we have the right team in place.  
  
Anybody who argues otherwise would do well to consider the elevated level of
risk that is still inherent in the NBN even after all of our work and the work
of Bill Morrow and his team.  
  
[1] Parliament of Australia, Senate Economics Committee – ‘Performance of the
Australian Securities & Investments Commission’ – Canberra, June 2014, p.449.  
  
[2] Online at: http://www.deloitte.com/assets/Dcom-
Australia/Local%20Assets/Documents/news-
research/Building%20the%20lucky%20country/Deloitte_Digital_Disruption_Whitepaper_Sep2012.pdf  
  
[3] Online at:  
  
http://www.deloitte.com/view/en_AU/au/news-research/luckycountry/digital-
disruption/index.htm  
  
[4] Australia Post – FY2014 Financial Results - Online at:
http://auspost.com.au/about-us/australia-post-fy14-financial-results.html  
  
[5] NBN Co – NBN Co Strategic Review – Dec 2013, pp.38-40. Note the blowout in
required funding is $34 billion (or 77 per cent) if the original forecast and
post-election revised outlook use the same 20 per cent capex contingency
reserve.