Speech to launch China Update 2014 Conference at the ANU 11 July 2014  
  
\------------------------------------  
  
Thank you very much Professor Garnaut for inviting me to open the China Update
2014 Conference here in the China in the World Centre at the ANU with the
theme “Deepening Reform for China’s Long Term Growth and Development”.  
  
  
  
Nearly twenty years ago, on August 4 1994, I established with the Zhangjiakou
City Government and the Hebei Province Geological Bureau a contractual joint
venture, Hebei HuaAo Mining Industry Company Ltd, to explore and develop a
promising lead zinc deposit at Caijiaying near the town of Zhangbei in Hebei
Province. It was the first sino-western joint mining venture in China.  
  
Those were exhilarating days. China had opened to the world under the
leadership of Deng Xiao Ping - whose famous ‘southern tour’ two years before
had signalled there was no turning back from his embrace of the market - but
it was also early days. Zhangjiakou had no smart hotels, no shopping malls, no
hint of the prosperity that was to come.  
  
Hebei HuaAo Mining reports In 2013 that mine produced 788,000 tonnes of ore
mined and milled, 40,752 tonnes of zinc in concentrate and 1551 tonnes of lead
in concentrate - generating sales revenue of 461 million RMB and paying tax of
107 million RMB. The mine has paid 449 million RMB of tax in the last four
years and employs 700 local people.  
  
Although it is a long time since I was a shareholder, I am very proud that we
were able to establish that mine - not simply because it was the first of its
type, but because it has contributed to the growth and prosperity of China,
bringing together Australian and Chinese expertise in every relevant field.
One of my colleagues at the time, geologist Dr Zhou Bo, is I am very pleased
to say still actively involved as a director of the project.  
  
Last night you launched another fine collection of essays with the same title
as the conference and I am sorry I could not join you, but the apparently
simple business of getting from Wellington to Canberra proved more time
consuming and challenging than I had hoped.  
  
I am glad my son Alex was there nonetheless to represent the Turnbull jia.I
like to think that stories of my business adventures in China inspired him to
study Chinese which in due course led him to his beautiful wife Wang Yi Wen.  
  
There is enormous interest in China, its people, its progress and its economy
in Australia. But there is also great affection, and modern Australia could
not be imagined without the contribution of the large and growing community of
Australians of Chinese descent, who the Commonwealth Statistician tells us
numbered more than 866,000 at the 2011 census.  
  
There is much, much more to the relationship between our two countries than
economics: China - its people, its culture and its history - is part of
Australia. One of the great strengths of our multicultural society is that all
of us, regardless of our own particular racial or cultural background, share
in and are enriched by the cultures of our fellow countrymen and women.  
  
China is exceptional - unique - in so many ways. But perhaps no more so than
in both the pace and scale at which it has taken hundreds of millions of
people from poverty to the middle class.  
  
No country, large or small, has quadrupled its per capita income from $2000 to
$8000 in so short a time as the 16 years it took China, from 1995 to 2011.
Australians needed 107 years to do that! Although to be fair that was a very
long time ago.  
  
In the modern era Japan took 17 years, South Korea and Taiwan 20. But no
nation, ever, has made this transition so quickly, nor on such a scale.1  
  
There are many controversies in China economics, but everybody agrees there
are deep structural imbalances in the Chinese economy - the most visible
manifestation of which has been the low and until recently declining share of
consumption in GDP.  
  
Chinese citizens and, even more so, businesses have been saving more and
investing more. There are many reasons for this. The constant inflow of labour
from the countryside suppressed wages growth for a long time, and while
household incomes grew, business incomes and the rest of the economy grew even
faster.  
  
The paper contributed by Xiaolu Wang and Yixiao Zhou points to the way in
which growing income inequality, the source of many other social and political
problems, has also exacerbated the saving problem. Households on higher
incomes save a greater share of that income, and so as more of the income pie
found its way to the rich overall household consumption declined.2  
  
In their discussion of whether China can escape the middle income trap,
Yingjie Feng and Yang Yao observe that one of the salient characteristics of
economies that avoid it, such as Korea and Japan, is a fairly equal income
distribution, much more equal than is the case in China today.3  
  
But probably the biggest cause of this imbalance has been the consistent
policy of financial repression - particularly the limitations that Chinese
households, which had powerful social and cultural incentives to save, had on
where could safely invest.  
  
For lack of a better offer they entrusted their savings to state-controlled
banks which returned negative real interest rates, and proceeded to on-loan
those deposits to state-owned enterprises, often engaged in property
development, at negligible real interest rates - an average of 2.9 per cent
over the past decade according to Owen Freestone and Dougal Horton4 but
arguably significantly lower if you agree with Harry Wu’s contention that the
GDP deflator has been materially underestimated5  
  
This constituted a significant transfer of wealth from thrifty households to
all too often inefficient state owned businesses. . Michael Pettis has
estimated its magnitude at as much as 5 to 8 per cent of GDP annually.6 Just
as cheap and abundant labour encourages firms to engage in labour-intensive
production, so the availability of what in real terms was ‘free’ money
exaggerated incentives to invest. If funds can be borrowed from friendly bank
managers at rates well below the nominal growth in GDP, almost any project
passes muster.  
  
All of the human frailties, vanity, optimism bias, expense and privilege
preferencing not to speak of corruption, make prudent investment, especially
by governments, in any environment difficult; but if you combine all of that
with free money then you have a recipe for widespread mal-investment.  
  
Pettis observes:  
  
“Because low-risk investments return 20% on average in a country with 20%
nominal GDP growth, financial repression means that the benefits of growth are
unfairly distributed between savers (who get just the deposit rate, say 3%)
banks who get the spread between the lending and the deposit rate (say 3.5%)
and the borrower who gets everything else, (13.5% in this case assuming he
takes little risk - even more if he takes risk)”  
  
Let me observe in passing that in a market economy like Australia the closest
parallel to “free money” mal-investment we see is when Governments decide on
behalf of taxpayers to finance grandiose thought-bubble infrastructure, and
then explain away the negligible or negative returns, mismanagement, budget
and schedule blowouts by recategorising their multi billion dollar blunders as
heroic “nation-building,” a phrase I’ve always interpreted as a warning to
citizens to hang on tight to their wallets.  
  
The good news however is that after many years of the Chinese Government
declaring it would do something about this financial repression, change is
finally afoot. The official lending rate has risen to 7.5% and just as
importantly nominal GDP growth has dropped to under 8% in the first quarter of
this year.  
  
China may face less growth, but with higher real interest rates the growth
that does continue will be focused on a more productive use of resources.  
  
China is pushing for more disclosure as its financial markets are
disintermediated from the formal banking sector to securities and alternative
channels like Alibaba’s Yu’’e’bao and this should be pushed further while
acknowledging that there is nothing wrong with an Ebay equivalent moving into
credit.  
  
Yu’e bao (left over treasure) is reported as having more investors, 81
million, than China’s equity markets, 67 million and to be holding over $80
billion in deposits.7 Its online rivals Tencent Holding and Baidu have
launched similar products. While these businesses, by offering higher interest
rates to depositors, are cutting into the traditional banks’ interest margins,
so far the official reaction has been cautiously benign with Premier Li
Keqiang saying last week that the government would “promote the healthy
development of Internet banking.”8  
  
After all, who has better data with which to underwrite credit risk, the
business that knows each and every one of your products, customers, and sales,
or a bank that just sees the cash come in and go out?  
  
More importantly still it offers the prospect that household consumption and
hence income will start to grow at a faster rate than GDP (it cannot become a
more normal” share of GDP without doing so of course).  
  
The challenge for the political leadership is how to ensure that household
income and consumption can grow faster than GDP, with the consequence that
there will be slower growth in investment and especially construction activity
but do so without unacceptable increases in unemployment.  
  
A Chinese economy with a higher share of consumption (say 50% plus ) will have
a much larger services sector which is, of course, much more labour intensive
than the capital intensive heavy industries and infrastructure projects which
have been so advantaged in the past.  
  
This re-balancing is being supported by wage growth; whether China has passed
the Lewis turning point or not, the endless supply of cheap labour from the
countryside is both diminishing and proving less suitable for the higher
skills required in a more sophisticated economy with a greater share of
services.  
  
Australia, in its capacity simply as an exporter of energy and iron ore, may
have some anxieties about the inevitable slowing in GDP growth as investment
slows to allow consumption to grow. There is as usual considerable controversy
about the rate at which investment and GDP will decline. Freestone and Horton
suggest that a decline in the investment share of GDP by 10% will lead to a
2.7 per cent reduction in real GDP with a reduction in the size of the capital
stock by 11%.9 This would however only see investment decline to the still
relatively high 37% of GDP - about equal to the peak investment/GDP ratio
achieved by Korea and Japan.  
  
After years of this rebalancing not occurring, it does seem now that it will
happen driven by a combination of government policy, demographic change,
liberalisation and disintermediation driven by the growing Internet economy
and on that score it is worth noting that Alibaba is reported as having 2.5
times the turnover of Amazon and 4 times that of eBay.  
  
China has embraced ecommerce like no other country. There is probably nowhere
in the world where so much change - economic, social, political - is arising
from the phenomenon of the smart phone - the device all of us and increasingly
many if not yet most Chinese have in their pockets. A tiny device with the
processing power of a 1995 super computer connected to the Internet 24/7! As
friends of China and as trusted trading partners we in Australia have a vital
vested interest in China’s success and in the important economic rebalancing
restated as recently as the third plenum last year being achieved. Less
resource-intensive growth in China will offer a vast and growing range of
opportunities for enterprising Australians and Australian enterprises.  
  
Just as China has recently had to re-conceive its own economy as it
liberalises key factor markets (especially capital, but also land and energy)
much as from 1978 on it rapidly opened and liberalised product markets, so too
Australia has to re-conceive China. We need to think of China less as a
destination for bulk commodities - coal, gas and iron ore - and more as a
sophisticated market for high quality, differentiated services - education,
architecture, design, legal and financial services and technical services
among many others.  
  
The best way for Australians to share and support that prosperity is by
enhancing our understanding of China and its economy - and surely nobody has
contributed more to that end than Professor Ross Garnaut.  
  
Thank you for inviting me to open your conference. I look forward to the
discussions that follow.  
  
Footnotes  
  
1\. “Deepening Reform for China’s Long Term Growth and Development” Ligang
Song, Ross Garnaut, Cai Fang (eds) ANU 2014 at p. 9 ↩  
  
2\. Ibid at p. 56 in “Structural Imbalance, inequality and economic growth” by
Xiaolu Wang and Yixiao Zhou ibid at p. 133 ↩  
  
3\. Ibid at p. 133↩  
  
4\. Ibid at p. 107↩  
  
5\. See “China’s Growth and productivity Performance Debate Revisited” Harry X
Wu The Conference Board January 2014↩  
  
6\. Mr Pettis makes this argument in many places, a recent paper is his June
24 2014 paper “What does a “good” transition look like?” which can be found on
his China Financial Markets blog.↩  
  
7\. See ibtimes.com Moran Zhang 10 July 2014, also FT “China Funds: Web Coup
by Yu’e Bao spurs rivals into action” by Judith Evans June 15 2014↩  
  
8\. Ibid↩  
  
9\. “Deepening Reform for China’s Long Term Growth and Development” Ligang
Song, Ross Garnaut, Cai Fang (eds) ANU 2014 at p. 128↩