Our city slept uneasy - if it slept at all - the night of 15 December 2014.  
  
The warmth of summer, the last minute plans for dinners and holidays and
presents the bright eyed excitement and anticipation of a city of children -
it was the week before Christmas.  
  
And then into our midst. Evil, hatred, death.  
  
The city had gone to bed that night praying the siege would end peacefully.  
  
No effort was spared to ensure it did. But in the early morning of 16 December
our peace was shattered by a cruel and murderous hatred.  
  
Two beautiful young and courageous people were killed.  
  
The cafe manager Tori Johnson and Katrina Dawson, a brilliant barrister and
mother of three young children.  
  
The next morning, only hours after the siege had ended, I was travelling on a
train across the city.  
  
There was a numb shock in the carriage. A still silence. Nobody spoke. A young
man gazed blankly into the middle distance. Was that a tear? He looked away
and wiped his face. Two girls stared at their smart phones, could find no
distraction and then, without a word hugged.  
  
Each of us was drawn into our inner self as we tried to rationalise the horror
that had invaded not just our city's heart, but our own.  
  
But as we clattered across the Harbour Bridge, wrapped in such deep sadness,
there was a determined love in that train, in those hearts, a love too strong
to be intimidated by hatred.  
  
A love that was as wise as it was determined. Determined not to be fearful.
Wise to confound, and not to further, the work of those who seek to harm us.  
  
The heart of the city, the heart of our people knew that hatred was weak and
that love was strong. Knew that the object of hatred is yet more hatred.  
  
Through the day that followed in Martin Place, in St Mary's Cathedral - all
across our nation - we saw such strength from our community as we all
affirmed, in a hundred different ways, love's triumph over hate.  
  
Martin Place became a field of love. And each of those who laid a flower drew
strength from all the others.  
  
A young bride, a moslem, still in her wedding dress, laid down her bouquet.  
  
#I'llridewithyou.  
  
Sometimes it feels as though we are on a flimsy boat tossed about on a sea of
hate.  
  
Yes, there is plenty of hatred in this most imperfect world of ours, but our
boat is not flimsy. Far from it.  
  
It is made of the strongest timber, it is made of deeply held democratic
values founded in the love of and respect for humanity.  
  
Frail and selfish, foolish and unforgiving - we can be all those very human
things.  
  
But when we love, then in the midst of this deep mystery, then - more than
ever, we are closest to God.