Well, thank you very much Charlie and thank you very much, Richard for the
very generous and warm welcome to country. And like all of our speakers, I
acknowledge that we are on Larrakia country, and I pay my respects to the
Elders both past and present and future. That line of continuity, that John
just spoke about, so welcome to Casuarina Beach [inaudible] is very real, but
you are right, I won’t have time to go there.  
  
Nonetheless, I know what you mean you brought it all alive in our hearts,
Richard and you’re welcome, so thank you, thank you very much.  
  
Can I say how really proud I am to be here today, at the Commonwealth and the
Northern Territory Government, and other supporters, Charles Darwin University
of course, have made this possible and that's very important - and that's been
because of the support of all of you. Natasha Griggs has been an enthusiastic
supporter of the University and the centre, as of course is Warren Snowdon,
who sadly is not here today. And I see my friend Nova Peris, Senator, who is
here as well.  
  
But you know, the passion of the people who work here is what really drives
it. You could see, as Alan Cass spoke about, what he is seeking to do to
address the four horsemen, though you’re mostly focussing on the renal
horsemen in our discussion today. But, your passion for making a real
difference, for the good, for Aboriginal health is just so obvious and the
work, the enthusiasm of the researchers here is so compelling.  
  
Rick Price, what you are doing in the region on malaria is equally vitally
important. And you are right that the Vietnamese, the Vietnam's President and
myself, are the Chairs of that initiative and we discussed that in Manila just
a few days, I just spoke to him yesterday in fact.  
  
So, as the Vice Chancellor said, Darwin really sits at this extremely
important and historic point between Australia and Asia. Australia is part of
Asia of course but this is such a critical point in human history. We are
living in the most exciting time in the history of human development. The pace
of change is utterly without precedent and it is most rapid here, in our
region.  
  
The changes that are going on in our region have no precedent, the rate of
change is extraordinary and so, here is Darwin, positioned as a city, as a
multicultural city, a city with a strong indigenous heritage going back tens
of thousands of years, but also city of today and tomorrow. So, perfectly
positioned. And, at the heart of all of that is science, research and, of
course, the work that you do here at the Menzies School of Health Research.
Named after John Mathews and I'm really honoured to be here to open, to
officially declare the building open.  
  
I want to just make one final observation, if I may. Alan and I had a chat
before we came down here, with the Vice Chancellor, about the importance of
securing more support for the school and the whole research program. And I
really commend that vision to you all. I think the, you know, governments
obviously have the deepest pockets, there is no doubt about that, it is always
nice when people thank governments for their generosity, you know, something
that is your money. Governments shouldn't be, it is very kind of you to thank
us but we are just doing, I think is very kind, we're just doing our jobs.
But, you know, the importance of securing support from philanthropic donors,
foundations is a very valid one and I have said to Alan that I will help him
and his colleagues here in, you know, down south and also up here as well.  
  
I think is very important, philanthropy is very important, it is extra
dollars, it doesn't buy you any more than a dollar from the government, but it
brings with it a lot of personal commitment and lasting support and advocacy,
that can be very valuable in your work. So, I am very happy to support that
too.  
  
So, can I congratulate all of you. I want to acknowledge the great success of
the Menzies School of Health Research. And can I just give you a few little
facts that I can just, it is easier for me to boast about you than for you
Alan, although you are not a man to hide your light under a bushel. But with
eight of seventeen Menzies research projects funded, it is a success rate that
far exceeds the national average of 13.7 per cent. So, this is the most
successful institution in terms of securing NHMRC support and that is a
tribute to the quality of the researchers and the scientists here.  
  
And finally, finally, you should never believe a politician when he says
finally, the other things you never believe a politician is when he says 'I
will be brief', that's always a promise that is always disappointed.  
  
I was so impressed to see the young researchers you have, the young women we
met on the way through here, you have really inspired young people as well.
You know, one of the big challenges is how can we get more young people to
study science and medicine and technology and, you know, all the STEM
subjects, and we have our young lady, from year 12, who was helping at the lab
there. And a first-year student from CDU, and I was really really impressed
with the young lady from PNG who was doing a PhD here, so terrific
collaboration in the regionally, as well as inspiring young people.  
  
So, all in all, it has been a great visit. I cannot commend you enough for the
great work you are doing and I look forward to supporting you in the future.