SPEECH TO THE STATE COUNCIL  
  
LIBERAL PARTY OF AUSTRALIA (VICTORIAN DIVISION)  
  
  
  
9 April 2016  
  
  
  
E&amp;OE...;  
  
  
  
PRIME MINISTER:  
  
Well thank you very much Greg, and good morning. Another beautiful Melbourne
day – another couple of days in Melbourne, as usual, indulging in my passion
for Melbourne’s trams. And occasionally, on the trams, for a Sydney Prime
Minister I am paid what I think is the ultimate compliment for a visitor from
out of town - when one of the locals asks for directions and not just a
selfie. So, at the outset, I want to thank President Michael Kroger and all of
the Administrative Committee for their tireless work through a very testing
year. I want to pay tribute to our State Liberal leader Matthew Guy who has
absolutely revitalised our Parliamentary team here in Victoria. Matt has
demonstrated that he is a leader ready to take on the serious policy
challenges to get Victoria’s growth back on track. And, today, can I assure
you Matt - and can I assure all Victorians - that there is $3 billion waiting
in the Commonwealth contingency reserve for the construction of the East-West
Link.  
  
[APPLAUSE] That commitment is ready for the moment - not too far off we trust
- when there is a government in Victoria prepared to do the right thing to
make that vital project happen. The East-West is the missing link in the
system that began with the Monash Freeway under Henry Bolte, and City Link
under Jeff Kennett. It is pivotal to this state’s future transport
infrastructure. It’s an investment that will generate thousands of
construction jobs, and our commitment stands toward that important
construction project. Now, today, our division, your division, the Victorian
Division pays tribute to several of our retiring champions: Andrew Robb, Bruce
Billson, Michael Ronaldson and Sharman Stone. All have been ministers. All
have served our Party - and indeed our nation - with great distinction. The
Party’s debt to Andrew is enormous. Andrew was of course the Federal Director
of the Party from 1990 and was responsible for the triumphant 1996 campaign,
which we celebrated last night. But the most profound impact Andrew has had in
his service to Australia has been in his role as the most successful Trade
Minister in our history.  
  
The three new free trade agreements with China, Japan and South Korea, and the
Trans-Pacific Partnership with 11 leading trading economies of the Asia-
Pacific, will create massive new opportunities for Australian business in the
world’s most dynamic economies – and we are already seeing this right around
the country. These open markets, big new open markets are transforming the
opportunities for Australian exporters and the growth of resources, soft
commodity exports, agricultural exports, services, technology, tourism, it is
a formidable contribution securing our prosperity.  
  
Now Bruce Billson, of course, was responsible for small business in our
government. And he delivered with characteristically magnificent gusto our
$5.5 billion jobs and small business package. Bruce is always a passionate
advocate for changing Section 46 of the competition law to incorporate an
effects test better enabling small and medium businesses to compete with the
big end of town - in line with the recommendations of the Harper Review. I’m
proud to say that in my government that policy has been affected and the
effects test will be introduced into Section 46. And it is in no small measure
due to the dogged advocacy of Bruce Billson.  
  
Michael Ronaldson served with distinction in all the roles he has held, but
perhaps most significantly as Minister for Veterans’ Affairs, working with
passion and commitment for the men and women who put their lives on the line
keeping our nation safe. And as the minister for the Anzac Centenary, Ronno
presided over the commemoration of our most momentous anniversary last year -
at Gallipoli and around the world, cherishing and burnishing that heroic
national foundation story. Finally as Special Minister of State Ronno laid the
groundwork for one of the great reforms of our government - the reform of the
Senate voting system, so that from the next senate election it will be
Australian voters who decide where their preferences go, not preference
whisperers and the secret group voting tickets.  
  
I also want to pay special tribute to Sharman Stone, who is stepping down
after tirelessly representing the people of northern Victoria through the good
times and the tough times of fire, flood and drought over 20 years. As a
scholar, as a minister, as a passionate advocate for her constituents in the
electorate of Murray, Sharman has demonstrated her keen intellect, strong
social consciousness and indomitable energy and she will be sorely missed.
Thank you Sharman. Each of these leaders have made stellar contributions to
our national life, and our efforts to make Australia stronger and more
successful, as a society and as an economy -- more innovative, more
entrepreneurial, more resilient, more diverse. This is the great cause of
everyone in our party. The party of enterprise. Our side of politics
understands what it means to back yourself, to invest, to create jobs. To put
everything on the line and when things don't work out, to pick yourself up and
have another go. Our members are from every walk of life – we are a true
grassroots political movement -- from businesses big and small, to farmers,
professional people, the military, police. There is no profession, no
occupation, no line of business that is not represented in our ranks. So when
we discuss our economic plan for our nation’s future, there are backgrounds
and views brought to bear in our party room and in our Cabinet that reflect
Australia’s and our party’s rich diversity. I am privileged to count in my
Cabinet an abundance of talent from Victoria – Mitch Fifield, Kelly O’Dwyer,
Josh Frydenberg, Greg Hunt. And new to the ministry, Scott Ryan, Dan Tehan,
Alan Tudge. And the Nationals’ Darren Chester brings a voice for Gippsland to
the Cabinet as Minister for Transport and Infrastructure. That is a powerful
roll-call -- a big Victorian contingent; a talented Victorian contingent; a
tribute to this party and this division of our party, a Victorian contingent
that contributes great intellectual and policy heft to the task of delivering
victory at the election later this year. And of course I want to acknowledge
and welcome our extended Victorian team: Russell Broadbent, Sarah Henderson,
Kevin Andrews, Michael Sukkar and Jason Wood and of course the newest member
of our team, James Patterson. And let us not forget Mr Speaker - Tony Smith.
Tony Smith has brought a dignity, a calm dry wit --- and when the need arises
a flash of steely discipline -- to that most important national office. Tony
is a great credit to our party and our parliament and our nation and I thank
him for his work. It was Isaac Newton who once wrote: if I have seen further
it is because I have stood on the shoulders of giants, and all of us in
politics should acknowledge that. At a big function last night, which I know
many of you were at as well, we paid tribute to John Howard as we mark the 20
year anniversary of the election of one of the most successful and effective
governments in the history of our Federation.  
  
When I became Prime Minister I said the Howard Government was the gold
standard, and I meant it.  
  
And so we acknowledge the other Liberal giants, led by Menzies, on whose
shoulders we stand -- including from the Victorian Division: Peter Costello,
Peter Reith, Richard Alston, Kay Patterson, David and Rod Kemp, to name but a
few. They are our foundation, of the great values and success of our political
movement.  
  
Now my friends we are at a pivotal moment in our history as we transition from
an economy that has been fired up by an unprecedented mining construction boom
as we transition to the new economy of the 21st century. In this election
year, there is only one central issue – whether we complete our transition to
the new economy or we allow Labor to kill off that opportunity. This
transition is one I’ve consistently talked about for years. It is clear that
in order to succeed, in order to remain a high wage, generous social welfare
net, first world economy, we need to be more innovative, more competitive,
more productive. It is that transition which will deliver our children and
grandchildren the great jobs they deserve not just today, but tomorrow and for
years to come. This is the most exciting time to be an Australian. The
opportunities have indeed never been greater, but success is not guaranteed.
That is why we are directing every lever of government to ensuring Australians
can make that successful transition. That is what the next election will be
all about. Who do the people trust to steer the course to a secure, prosperous
and exciting future? Under my government and our economic leadership we are
seeing strong confidence and growth - 3 per cent real GDP growth last year;
over 300,000 new jobs created - the highest since 2007, well before the global
financial crisis. And the keys to continuing that successful transition are
technology, innovation, investment, infrastructure and open markets So it was
in December we launched our Innovation and science Agenda - $1.1 billion
committed to bring more Australian ideas to market, incentivise entrepreneurs
and invest more in education and research and ensure that our researchers
collaborated more with industry and business, so that more of the fruits of
that research translated in to jobs and opportunities here at home. As part of
that agenda, we are making it easier for start-ups and innovative small
businesses to access early stage capital, making it easier for more to access
government contracts, making it easier for them to take great ideas to market
and to grow. We launched our Defence White Paper –investing $1.6 billion over
10 years in local industry to build skills and drive competitiveness while
harnessing Australian innovation and expertise. And right across the defence
White Paper, in the tens of billions of dollars in expenditure to ensure our
armed forces have the capabilities to keep us safe in the years to come, we
are ensuring in so far as we can that every dollar we spend will be spent in
Australia. Because we build our security not simply by giving armed forces,
our armed forces the physical capabilities, the physical assets they need, but
by building the Australian industries and the Australian technologies that
will create them. So both in terms of the capabilities and the investment, an
industry that knows we are behind them. The defence White paper is a plan not
simply for strategic security but for economic security in the decades before
us.  
  
In the face of concerted Opposition from the Labor Party and the union
movement we drove the China Free Trade Agreement legislation through
Parliament and over 85% of Australia’s goods will enter China duty free as a
result. We have continued to invest in water infrastructure to ensure our
agricultural exporters get the best out of our Free Trade Agreements. We are
supporting record levels of infrastructure through a $50 billion
infrastructure package – and Infrastructure Australia’s rolling 15 year plan
gives certainty to industry, to promote private investment, and ensures
funding is directed to infrastructure that delivers real tandum economic
benefits. Now as part of that plan we are committed to supporting high quality
transport projects here in Victoria.  
  
I spoke earlier of our commitment to the East-West Link. Well that will have
to wait for the arrival of Premier Matt Guy. In the meantime, the Treasurer
and I have written to our counterparts, Andrews and Pallas, to advise them we
cannot allow the $1.5 billion previously earmarked for the East-West Link to
be left sitting idly in the state’s accounts -- or artificially propping up
the Labor Governments Budget. We need to put that money to work. Accordingly,
we are prepared to commit the $1.5 billion held by Victoria, plus all interest
earned, to these land transport infrastructure projects that have been
identified in Infrastructure Australia’s Priority List.  
  
$500 million towards the Monash Freeway upgrade. $350 million towards the
Western Ring Road upgrade; $220 million towards the Murray Basin freight rail
upgrade; All of them requiring a matching contribution from the Victorian
Government.  
  
We will also fund two sub-packages as part of that $1.5 billion to improve
economic development in cities and in regional Victoria: $340 million
collectively towards Rural and Regional Highways promoting safety right across
the state. $75 million towards smaller Urban projects to relieve congestion.
One of the projects funded will be a $10 million Commonwealth commitment to
upgrade The Great Ocean Road.  
  
The aim of all of these projects is consistent and follows the direction and
the planning of our government, driving economic growth, improving
productivity, making it easier for business to move goods around the city and
state, enable Victorians to get where they need to go with less disruption and
inconvenience.  
  
Better transport infrastructure is vital to our economic success.  
  
  
  
In the 21st economy, however, human capital is our most critical asset.
Enabling the skills, talents and ingenuity of our people defines our future
success. That’s why we’re determined to continue to improve workforce
participation. We’re introducing a $3.2 billion child-care subsidy making it
easier for parents, particularly those on low incomes to go back to work. This
should bring the equivalent of 20, 000 full time workers back into the labour
market. We’re investing $322 million in the Transition to Work program to
improve the work readiness of young people aged 15-21.  
  
In telecommunications we’ve eliminated around 3,000 mobile blackspots
nationwide, through round one of our program, with an additional $60 million
invested in round 2. We’re investing $7.8 billion in the NBN this financial
year, which means by June 2018, three in four Australians will have access to
the NBN. And you know after six years of Labor Government, after so many
billions of dollars of waste, after so much fibre-to-the-press release, do you
know how many premises in Victoria had been connected to the network in built
up areas? Slightly more than 5,000. Our government has worked hard to turn
around that abysmal performance. And I would acknowledge which five of my
successors, minister for communications, those of us that have been involved
in big projects will attest; the melancholy experience of life is that bad
projects generally get worse, generally they get a lot worse. We are turning
this very bad project around. We can’t recover all of the money Labor lost but
we are improving it in terms of performance and delivery. As of last week,
385,000 premises in Victoria have access to the network and we have increased
the number of connections in built-up areas by twenty fold.  
  
We are establishing a new $1 billion Clean Energy Innovation Fund, I want to
acknowledge Greg Hunt for his leadership in putting that together. Investing
$100 million every year in cutting-edge Australian clean-energy technologies
and business to ensure we not only drive jobs and innovation but also play our
part responsibly and effectively in reducing carbon emissions.  
  
The Budget we will hand down on May 3 will include changes to our tax system
designed to generate jobs and growth; promote investment, innovation and
enterprise. But overarching all of this, however, is a fundamental truth --
governments at all levels, and all Australians concerned for the future
economic security of our country, have to accept the reality that we must live
within our means. This Budget will not be about a fistful of dollars. It will
be about prudence, fairness and responsibility to our future generations. As
we learned at COAG last week the States are keen for the Federal Government to
raise taxes for them to spend - but have no interest in raising taxes
themselves. The upshot was a revealing moment of great clarity. The Premiers
don’t want to raise taxes to pay for their spending. Well, neither do we. So
that’s clear: we all have to live within our means.  
  
The only way to ensure we have great jobs in the future, to ensure we have the
revenues that will enable us to deliver great schools and great hospitals, is
to have a strong and successful economy. Excessive taxes, excessive debt,
serve as a handbrake on economic growth. Everything we’re doing -- innovation,
competition, trade, investment and infrastructure -- is focused on powering
economic growth. If we don’t keep building constantly on this plan for that
successful economic transition to the new economy, our economic growth will
stall, jobs will go and opportunities will be lost to others.  
  
We hear almost nothing of Mr Shorten’s plans for the economy. All we hear of
are his plans to spend more money… but he can never explain how he intends to
pay for it. and that is the fundamental test for Mr Shorten -- the numeracy
test, if you like that he can no longer shirk: How is he going to pay for his
$51 billion of unfunded promises? Higher taxes? More debt? Or both?  
  
If he cannot come clean on that, it’s a sure sign that he’s learned nothing
from Labor’s failures in six years of government. As Paul Kelly wrote this
week, his is basically the Gillard agenda with a new coat of paint. Bill
Shorten cannot be trusted with this nation’s finances. On so many levels,
Labor under Shorten is a risk to our economic advancement. Right at the heart
of the economic reform we need is restoring the rule of law to the labour
market. And two major pieces of legislation will address this. One is the
Registered Organisations Bill which anticipated most of the recommendations of
the Hayden Royal Commission by requiring unions and employer organisations to
have similar rules of transparency, and accountability as apply to
corporations. You would think that Labor would welcome the chance to restore
confidence in the union movement, so damaged. And yet three times now Labor
supported by the Greens and crossbenchers have blocked this law in the Senate.
They’ve also blocked legislation to re-establish the Australian Business and
Construction Commission to restore and enforce the rule of law in the
construction industry. And, what is at stake here, is economic reform is
critical to the nation’s future. You in Victoria know better than most the
impact of industrial disruption by construction unions. Who can forget the
ugly spectacle of militants laying siege to the streets of the city during the
Emporium dispute? Construction is a vital industry for our future. It employs
more than a million workers. A competitive and productive construction sector
is critical if we are to have the infrastructure of the 21st century at a
price the Australian taxpayer can afford. We’d hoped that after the Royal
Commission the case for restoration of the ABCC would be irresistible. But
Labor, the Greens and most of the cross bench have continued to say no - the
CFMEU they assure us, are fine fellows. Only this week, we had the spectacle
of the Labor member for Bendigo, Lisa Chesters, standing shoulder-to-shoulder
with the CFMEU’s John Setka at a union rally. Have they not bothered to read
the mountain of evidence uncovered by Justice Heydon? Don’t they care about
the impact on the Victorian economy of the intimidation and disruption of the
construction sector through unlawful industrial action? Do they care only
about the CFMEU’s campaign chequebook? As of this week, 108 CFMEU officials
are before the courts with over 1000 separate charges relating to breaches of
the industrial law. Two-thirds of those proceedings relate to unlawful
behaviour here in Victoria. The damage to the economy, the Victorian economy,
the national economy is utterly unacceptable. Only this week, the Fair Work
Building and Construction lodged a claim against the CFMEU over a coordinated
industrial campaign that put at risk the delivery of more than half a billion
dollars’ worth of construction projects, including four hospitals and an aged
care facility. Now that cannot be excused or dismissed by Bill Shorten. This
industrial bullying is penalising the Victorian economy, it’s imposing
unnecessary and mounting costs on the taxpayers of this state. And that is the
risk with Labor. No matter what the findings of successive inquiries, and no
matter how many CFMEU officials come before the courts, they wilfully ignore
this blight on our economic performance and are determined to do nothing about
it. And when they are not appeasing trade union supporters, they favour
policies which will disrupt the economy and obstruct our successful economic
transition. Let’s be quite clear about this: Labor’s policy to increase
capital gains tax by 50% and to ban negative gearing on all assets other than
new dwellings will, and are clearly designed to, reduce investment,
entrepreneurship, materially reduce the value of residential property -
Australia’s largest single asset class, reduce the availability of rental
properties and increase rents. Labor clearly wants people to invest less, to
take less risk, to borrow less, to build businesses less, to create less jobs
– and let me assure you they have the policies to do just that. Shorten cannot
be trusted with the economy. His clumsy protectionism on the steel industry
would put at risk billions of dollars of Australian exports, the integrity of
our free trade agreements and it is no wonder his front bench is already
distancing themselves from his reckless policy on the run. We cannot allow
Shorten, Labor and their union backers to stand in the way of advancing this
nation’s long-term economic future.  
  
Having secured reform to the Senate voting system, we are recalling senators
on April 18 to give them three full weeks, if they choose to use them, to
reconsider their opposition to the ABCC and Registered Organisations Bills. We
will not allow Bill Shorten’s backward-looking Labor Party to use the Senate
to block legitimate and necessary economic reform.  
  
Innovation, technology, investment, infrastructure, free trade -- these are
the keys to unlocking exciting new opportunities for Australian business, the
exciting new opportunities for Australian jobs, the future for our children
and grandchildren.  
  
There is a way to a successful 21st century economy and we are on that road
led by a Coalition Government, we are on that way, but Labor is threatening to
stand in the way and block it. Their policies would block the path to
entrepreneurship, they would undermine investment, they would deter
employment, they would undermine the chance for our children and grandchildren
to seize the opportunities of this the most exciting time in human history.  
  
They are stuck in the past clinging to their old out of date Labor Union
paymasters. We have a strong case my friends, because what we offer
Australians is a clear vision, every measure, every policy, counting towards
the achievement of the great jobs, the great opportunities of the twenty first
century, built on the absolute philosophical foundation of our Party.  
  
Which is after all a party committed to freedom. We believe deep in our DNA,
that the job of government is to enable Australians to do their best, to
enable them to use that freedom, that ingenuity, that entrepreneurship to
invest to employ and to grow. Then they will create the successful future we
all depend upon.  
  
They will create the opportunities, they will seize those opportunities. Labor
is promising a restriction on economic freedom of a breadth and scope we have
not seen in generations. I know that we will keep Australia safe from Labor
when we return our government at the election this year.  
  
Thank you very much.  
  
ends