Mr TURNBULL (Wentworth—Minister for Communications) (11:12): I move:  
  
That this bill be now read a second time.  
  
The Telecommunications Legislation Amendment (Consumer Protection) Bill 2013
introduces important amendments to reduce the administrative burden of
telecommunications legislation on industry; enhance consumer protections; and
ensure the Telecommunications Industry Ombudsman scheme is periodically
reviewed and updated to meet best practice standards.  
  
In a rapidly changing communications environment it is essential that the
codes under which the industry operates can be readily updated in response to
new technology and changing service standards and that Australian consumers
can have problems with their telecommunications services quickly resolved.  
  
I note that these legislative measures were introduced in a very similar form
by the former government prior to the September election and that the earlier
version of this bill received bipartisan and industry support at the time.
This bill contains several key measures.  
  
The bill enhances the operational efficiency of the Do Not Call Register Act
2006 by clarifying the meaning of 'cause' in that act in relation to the party
responsible for making a telemarketing call or sending a marketing fax.  
  
Approximately nine million telephone numbers are listed on the Do Not Call
Register, including two-thirds of Australian households with a fixed line home
telephone and close to four million mobile telephone numbers.  
  
Amendments included in this bill will provide the Australian Communications
and Media Authority with the ability to undertake more effective enforcement
action in relation to unsolicited telemarketing calls and marketing faxes.  
  
The amendments being made will also clarify responsibility for unsolicited
marketing calls and faxes so that a party contracting with an intermediary
that makes telemarketing calls or sends telemarketing faxes cannot evade
responsibility for compliance with the Do Not Call Register by using
intermediaries of that kind on their behalf.  
  
The proposed amendments to the Telecommunications Act 1997 included in this
bill will simplify the process of updating the body of industry codes that
form the basis of the telecommunications industry's self and co-regulatory
framework.  
  
These codes cover, among other things, consumer protections, technical
matters, operational and inter-operator arrangements. They are registered—and
when necessary enforced—by the ACMA.  
  
Under existing legislation, making changes to a registered code has required
that the entire document be opened up for formal revision—a process that at
times has entailed more than a year of work by multiple stakeholders. These
amendments will allow code developers to maintain robust and dynamic industry
codes by enabling them to be varied or amended, rather than being replaced in
their entirety, subject to the approval of the ACMA. Additionally, the
amendments:  
  
extend the reimbursement scheme for developing consumer related industry codes
to also apply to variations of those codes; and improve the transparency of
code development by requiring draft codes and most submissions to be published
on the code developer's website. The telecommunications industry has welcomed
the proposed amendments to the Telecommunications Act which will also
facilitate a planned program to reduce the co-regulatory burden on the sector
by streamlining and consolidating requirements where these are duplicated
within multiple codes.  
  
Such measures will complement this government's broader efforts to reduce the
red-tape burden on all sectors of the Australian economy which we intend to
lead to savings of $1 billion per year.  
  
Lastly, the bill also introduces amendments to provide greater regulatory
clarity around the role of the Telecommunications Industry Ombudsman (TIO) and
its expected standards of operation. These amendments were developed in
response to recommendations from a 2012 review of the TIO scheme.  
  
The bill achieves this objective by requiring the TIO scheme to comply with
standards determined by legislative instrument made by the minister.  
  
The bill also requires the TIO scheme to be independently reviewed and provide
for consultation with the public and the ACMA. The TIO will be required to
publish a final review report on its website and respond to any review
recommendations within a specific time frame. These amendments will ensure the
TIO scheme continues to operate as a best practice alternative dispute
resolution service—a great example of the industry solving consumer problems
rather than relying on government regulation. The various amendments in this
bill are not contentious and have the support of industry, regulatory
authorities and consumer representatives.  
  
There is no doubt the communications landscape is entering a critical phase
where changes in technology are making traditional regulatory frameworks
either inefficient or redundant. This bill removes certain regulatory
rigidities while preserving transparency and accountability for
telecommunications consumers.  
  
I commend the bill to the House.  
  
Debate adjourned.