Mr TURNBULL (Wentworth—Minister for Communications) (16:16): When we lost Alby
Shultz we lost one of the most colourful, engaging and sometimes irascible
members of this House. He was, of course, the longest-serving member for the
federation seat of Hume. He was born in Melbourne on 29 May 1939. Alby, who
died recently at the age of 76, had been ill for a long time and had retired
from parliament at the 2013 election, following a diagnosis of liver cancer.  
  
He was a very passionate liberal, and as many of us have noted the Liberal
Party room, which is, as you know, Mr Deputy Speaker—rather, as a member of
the National Party the Deputy Speaker does not attend Liberal Party
meetings!—the Liberal Party meets at the beginning of each two-week sitting of
parliament for half an hour at nine o'clock on a Tuesday. The Liberal Party
meetings, of course, deal with matters of great interest to the Liberal Party
as distinct from the coalition.  
  
Since Alby has left us, there is not nearly so much to talk about. He was
quite able to fill up the whole half hour with his observations on matters
inter se—let us put it that way!—between the members of the coalition. Indeed,
when he was getting ready to retire from parliament he looked out for a
successor and, of course, he was delighted to find Angus Taylor, who is now
the member for Hume. As everyone knows, Alby had only two conditions—two
critical, absolutely essential conditions—one was that his successor had to be
somebody that had the capacity to be Prime Minister of Australia but, most
importantly, they could not be a member of the National Party under any
circumstances whatsoever!  
  
Alby was a very forthright member of the parliament and of the party room. Of
course, he was a member of the party room for many years. He came to this
parliament in 1998, having served in the New South Wales parliament for 10
years prior to that. I have many exhilarating memories of dealing with Alby
from when I was Leader of the Opposition—some of them more character-forming
than others. He had the great characteristic of being always thoroughly
himself.  
  
Of course, we have made the same observation about another much-loved member
of our party, Don Randall, who died recently too. Indeed, in a rather sombre
coincidence, Don died on the day of Alby's funeral. Alby leaves his wife,
Gloria, and his sons, Grant and Dean. Grant gave a really powerful and moving
eulogy for his father at Alby's funeral. Being a man, I will just speak about
men: it is always a very momentous time in a man's life when his father dies.  
  
Obviously, we all hope that our fathers live until they are very old—very old
indeed. Some of us are fortunate enough for that to happen; others are not.
Alby lived well past threescore years and 10, but 76 is not a very old age—at
least in the modern world. Grant spoke so movingly of his father. Every person
in that huge church in Cootamundra understood the grief of that family and the
significance of that watershed event that occurs to most people. Of course,
the vast majority of us, fortunately, have our fathers predecease us. Every
father wants to die long before their children; no-one wants to outlive their
children. Nonetheless, it was a very moving eulogy.  
  
Alby was a real worker. I remember, when I was young journalist working at the
Parliament of New South Wales, there were many members of that parliament on
both sides who were what the poet might have called 'horny-handed sons of
toil', and Alby definitely fell into that category. He started off working in
abattoirs, moved on to a management position with a meat-packing company and
then found his way into politics. He came from a working-class background,
very much so. Indeed, he said in his maiden speech that his grandmother on his
mother's side was a personal friend of John Curtin, and reflected that one of
his uncles had said that his grandfather would turn in his grave if he knew
Alby was a Liberal member of parliament.  
  
Alby seemed to think this was quite appropriate and confirmed that he expected
that his grandfather would be doing that! It is my submission to you, Mr
Deputy Speaker Scott, that he embodied some of the finest values of the
Liberal party. He had a very, very big heart. I do not want to suggest that
other parties do not have big hearts. But he had a very strong view that
people should work hard and get on with their lives with as little
interference from government as possible, and rise by their own efforts.  
  
He had a very sturdy, self-reliant philosophy and he lived those values. Alby
had many interests. One of them of course, being the representative of a rural
electorate, was telecommunications, and he complained about inadequate
telecommunications in his maiden speech. So it is good that in 2015, with the
Mobile Black Spot Program, we were able to announce 18 new or upgraded base
stations in that electorate, and 74 of the 139 black spots identified in Hume
were addressed in whole or in part. Alby would be very, very pleased by that
result. On my behalf and on behalf of Lucy, we extend our sympathies to Alby's
wife, Gloria; their sons, Dean and Grant, and their spouses; and their
grandchildren, whom Alby loved so much.