Mr TURNBULL (Wentworth—Minister for Communications) (11:27): Today we are
assembled, again, to say farewell to one of our nation's great leaders. We
have said farewell to Gough Whitlam this year, and now we say farewell to
Malcolm Fraser. Malcolm Fraser, as many speakers have noted, has been defined
by his great conflict with Gough Whitlam, not in his own mind and not in our
minds.  
  
That was an extraordinary conflagration in our political life. It is one that
Australians will talk about, read about and schoolchildren will study forever,
for centuries and as long as our nation exists. But Malcolm Fraser was a
remarkable man; a remarkable progressive liberal.  
  
  
  
The term 'progressive' has been used a few times in this debate already today.
It has been suggested that Malcolm Fraser in his later years became beloved of
progressives. But Malcolm Fraser was always progressive.  
  
Right back in the early 1960s, he noted on one occasion how remarkable it was
that people who opposed the tyranny of the Soviet Union were regarded as
extreme reactionary conservatives, but those who favoured a more lenient
approach and those who favoured some form of accommodation with the Soviet
Union were regarded as progressives.  
  
Yet, he asked, were those who fought for freedom, democracy and individual
liberty not the true progressives? I think we would agree now, with the 20/20
vision of hindsight, that they were. Before I go on, let me say a little about
the centrality of Malcolm Fraser's life.  
  
At the centre of his life, at the very heart of his life, was a great love
story. He and Tamie were married in 1956. He was 26 years of age and she was
20. So, barely out of her teens, she was suddenly the wife of a member of
parliament, and we all know what a tough road it is for the wives and families
of parliamentarians.  
  
Our own Prime Minister has said many times, and very insightfully, that all of
us here are volunteers; our families are the conscripts. And Tamie managed her
family of four children—Mark, Angela, Hugh and Phoebe—she managed all of that,
without any of the conveniences of modern life that we take for granted:
email, cheap telephony, sealed roads.  
  
She managed to move that family around from Canberra to Wannon to
Melbourne—all around the country—keeping it all together in that time. The
Deputy Prime Minister, the Leader of the National Party, spoke of the great
friendship between Doug Anthony and Malcolm Fraser, and it was a very deep
friendship.  
  
They were citizens, arm in arm, Madam Speaker, as you would recall—you were on
the other side, as I recall—on the side of the 'yes' vote in the republic
campaign. You could see the affection between them. But that relationship was
struck between their wives, when, in 1957, Doug Anthony was elected to
parliament—surprisingly; it was as much of a surprise to him as it had been to
Malcolm Fraser, when Malcolm Fraser threw his hat in the ring in a
preselection, as a young man of 24, thinking he would have no prospects.  
  
And, of course, Doug Anthony was thrust into parliament unexpectedly because
his father, who preceded him in the seat, had died. So you had two young
wives, Margot and Tamie, here in Canberra, a very cold place. As Tamie once
said, it seemed to be full of old, grey, bald men.  
  
An opposition member interjecting—  
  
Mr TURNBULL: 'Nothing's changed,' I heard somebody say! That is a very harsh
comment. Perhaps there are not quite as many men as there used to be, but
there are nonetheless still—I think we would all agree—too many, relative to
the women. But that pair formed a bond. They were both young women, having
their first babies together, both in this pretty tough environment.  
  
Above all—and I know that Malcolm's family will recognise this—out of all of
this, in the discussion of his great achievements, to which I will turn in a
moment, is this House's, this parliament's, this nation's love to them, to the
family, recognising their grief, their loss and, above all, honouring that
great love story which was the foundation of Malcolm and Tamie's joint
expedition into the public life of Australia and all the achievements that
flowed from that.  
  
I should say a little bit about Malcolm Fraser's demeanour. He was elected to
parliament as the youngest member of parliament at the time, at 24, but he was
also the tallest. He had always—partly, I think, because of his height—  
  
Government members interjecting—  
  
Mr TURNBULL: The member for Longman should not feel that as a backhanded
compliment! Unlike the member for Longman, the then member for Wannon, the
young member for Wannon, had a chilly demeanour. He was shy. I think a lot of
people took that for a real personal coldness, which was not the case.  
  
Malcolm Fraser was a shy man, and in some cases that was really
misinterpreted. And that, coupled with his height and a rather austere
appearance—the farmer from the Western District—meant it was easy to paint a
caricature, particularly contrary to the flamboyance of Gough Whitlam or
indeed the extraordinary gregarious conviviality of Bob Hawke, who succeeded
him.  
  
But he was always a very droll man. He had a very good sense of humour. I want
to recall a letter that Malcolm Fraser wrote to the Melbourne Sun on 3 June
1954, after he had only just failed to win the seat of Wannon from the Labor
Party. It was a Labor seat and he nearly won it. He lost by a few hundred
votes and then of course won it at the next election and then built up his
majority till it became a very safe seat.  
  
But he wrote this letter following the election:  
  
"Sir In the course of the recent federal election campaign statements been
made in the Melbourne press with respect to my football activities past and
future. Three statements have been quoted as having been made by me. All are
untrue. I did not say I played Australian Rules football for Melbourne Grammar
or rugger for Oxford University. No local team in the Western District has
ever approached me to play football. The only position that I would be
qualified to fill on a football field would be that of goal post."  
  
For a shy 24-year-old—honourable members can understand—he had a very good
sense of humour.  
  
Often governments and politicians and leaders get credit for doing things that
would have happened anyway because the tenor of the times is such that certain
reform was inevitably going to happen and the respective government or Prime
Minister—or minister, for that matter—is johnny-on-the-spot who happens to be
there to make the decision that had to be made.  
  
But the real mark of political achievement is when leaders actually change
history, when they do things that are different, and Fraser had a very deep
sense of this. After all, as the Treasurer—he is not here anymore; he has
vanished; that is quite a feat! But, as the Treasurer was saying earlier, in
Malcolm Fraser's Deakin lecture, where he used the line 'Life wasn't meant to
be easy,' he was actually summarising Arnold Toynbee's 12 volumes—which was
quite an achievement—which he had studied at Oxford. Toynbee's thesis really
was that civilisations basically are not destroyed by external forces; they
commit suicide; they give up. He made the point that we have to keep on
fighting; we have to recognise that we have big challenges and keep on going
at them. That is what he meant. It was not at all the smug remark that it was
later represented to be.  
  
When you look at what he did in respect of shaping the nature of Australia
today, it is really quite remarkable. When you sum up Australia to a foreign
friend, one of the first things you would say is, 'This is the most successful
multicultural society in the world.' There is no country in the world that has
a higher percentage of immigrants—that is to say, people who were born outside
of Australia. Not one.  
  
No comparable country has as high a percentage. America, supposedly the
melting pot, has half the percentage. And ours is so diverse. How have we been
able to do that so successfully? Well, this has been the work of generations
and of hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of Australians. Ultimately, it
comes from the good sense and big-heartedness of Australians. It has seen
enormous leadership from those in this chamber. Of course, the member for
Berowra, who I know will speak later, is one of the great architects of this.  
  
But Malcolm Fraser was so far ahead of his time. He was the first federal
politician, as far as we know—certainly the first minister—ever to use the
term 'multiculturalism' and talk about multiculturalism. He did so in a speech
to the State Zionist Council of New South Wales in 1969.  
  
That is a full four years before Al Grassby, described as the father of
multiculturalism, became a minister. You can see here where impressions can be
so misleading. Malcolm Fraser—tall, rather austere, suited, generally with a
waistcoat, with stiff English shoes, looking very much the creation of the
establishment—was undoubtedly a member, a scion, if you like, of the
Protestant ascendency in the Victorian establishment.  
  
It is easy to put him into that conservative box. Al Grassby, of course, had
his moustache, his purple suits and so forth—clearly a progressive and a
radical. But there was Malcolm Fraser, four years before, in office, making
those very points. His views on this matter, I think, were in large part
formed by sectarianism. As I said, he grew up in the days when sectarianism
was much stronger. He went into politics at the time of the Labor split; he
was very close to BA Santamaria. That is quite a tradition with Prime
Ministers on our side, so it seems—that is a compliment.  
  
Honourable members interjecting—  
  
Mr TURNBULL: They will laugh at anything; they are easily amused, Prime
Minister. Fraser deplored the way Billy Hughes, in the First World War, had
set out to divide the nation on sectarian grounds. This really marked his
thinking and, I believe, made a huge impact on his approach to
multiculturalism and racism in the years ahead. He was, as we know, a great
supporter of Aboriginal land rights, when in office as Prime Minister; views
that were strongly reinforced when he toured the Northern Territory as
education minister with Billy Wentworth, who was then the minister for
Indigenous affairs or whatever the department was called at that time.  
  
His treatment and welcoming of Vietnamese refugees was—and I say this without
a tinge of partisanship—in contrast to that of the previous Labor government.
In that respect, Fraser was very critical of the Whitlam government for not
being generous enough to refugees from Vietnam. In government this so-called
conservative, this stiff member of the establishment, had a much more generous
approach than any of his predecessors. In that sense, as you can see with
multiculturalism, with immigration and with antiracism, he was very, very much
ahead of his time—ahead of his time whether it was on the Liberal side or the
Labor side.  
  
The establishment of the Special Broadcasting Service, which has been
mentioned, was an extraordinary innovation—unique anywhere in the world, as
far as I am aware. That was very much a creation of Malcolm Fraser, inspired,
no doubt, by his adviser Petro Georgiou. When Petro retired from this House,
he said very eloquently of Malcolm Fraser:  
  
"To those who have sought to denigrate Malcolm Fraser, I just want to say one
thing: Malcolm’s fusion of political toughness with compassion and social
conscience is simply beyond their comprehension. "  
  
He has been criticised for not doing enough in terms of microeconomic reform.
That criticism is both inaccurate, up to a point, but also rather unfair. As
John Howard and Peter Reith have both said in recent times, Malcolm Fraser,
while he went into parliament as a young man, was very much there with the
views and attitudes of the 1950s and 1960s.  
  
Inevitably, he was imbued with the attitudes of men and women a generation
older than himself, because they were his peers. So you cannot look at the
economic debate of 2015 and go back to 1975, all those years—40 years—and say,
'They got it wrong; they weren't progressive enough; they didn't understand
it.' It was, in every respect, a very, very different world.  
  
During the republic campaign, as the Prime Minister observed, Malcolm Fraser
was deaf to the Prime Minister's eloquence and, thankfully, supported the
'yes' vote. He did so with someone who became his old friend—Gough Whitlam. I
will say a little bit about that in conclusion, but just let me say this about
the republic debate.  
  
Fraser made a remarkably energetic and thoughtful contribution to that debate.
He was hyperactive: he gave speeches, he wrote articles and he tackled one of
the very key constitutional points, which was whether, under the republican
model being proposed—the scheme, as honourable members will recall, was that
the Prime Minister could remove the president but not appoint the successor to
the president.  
  
This was one of the safeguards built into it. The argument was put by the
monarchist side that the Queen had no obligation to act on the advice of the
Prime Minister to appoint or remove a Governor-General. Fraser of course,
having been a Prime Minister and having had real, firsthand experience of
constitutional crises, was able to lend the authority of his office invoking
actually Robert Menzies, who had commented on this same point, to lend some
real authority and dignity to that debate.  
  
He made a very big contribution to the 'yes' campaign. Whenever we polled the
ratings, the respect and approval of various political figures engaged in the
campaign, he was at the very top. He was such a widely respected person. So
much else has been said about Malcolm Fraser's illustrious life.  
  
Can I just conclude on one lesson that I think he gives to all of us. People
in our line of work tend to get consumed with bitterness and resentment. Often
we have good cause to be or, at least, we think we do. Fraser, who had plenty
of detractors and plenty of enemies, was, nonetheless, not a hater. It was a
remarkable feature of his evolution.  
  
Remember that he ceased to be Prime Minister at age 52 or 53, so he was a
young Prime Minister and a young ex-Prime-Minister. But, despite all of that
tumult and all of the venom that had been expended at him, he did not look
backwards; he was focused on the issues of today and tomorrow.  
  
His last tweet, we all recall, was tweeting an article about Chinese foreign
policy. He was not interested in getting into his anecdotage, sitting back in
the armchair and talking about what might have been or who was right or wrong
in the sacking of Gorton or the sacking of Whitlam. He was focused on the
future.  
  
But he did so in a thoroughly positive way and, in that respect, gave all of
us an example that we should at every stage, like Fraser and like Whitlam did,
drive the negativity and hatred and bitterness out of ourselves, fill it with
love because that makes us stronger and makes our nation stronger.  
  
Farewell Malcolm Fraser. The nation has lost one of its greats. We salute you.
We pray for your family. They are in our prayers and we know that your role in
Australian history will be forever recognised as one of the greatest, one of
the architects of the extraordinary nation all of us are so honoured to
represent in this chamber.