Mr TURNBULL (Wentworth—Minister for Communications) (15:37): I thank Her
Excellency the Governor-General for outlining the direction and priorities of
our new government: cutting taxes, reducing regulation, redefining the role of
government and investing in 21st century broadband, roads and hospitals. If
there is a single philosophical thread weaving all of these reforms together,
surely it is this: that we are on our side of politics believe that the role
of government is to enable citizens to do their best, whereas our opponents on
the Labor side believe that government's role is to tell citizens what is
best. The stark difference that we see again and again through every policy
area bears out the importance and the significance of this distinction and the
failures of the 'government knows best' approach which were so apparent in the
last six years of Labor government. A touchstone of all of that is freedom, a
belief in the individual, a belief that citizens, individuals, private
businesses, are best able to chart their own destiny.  
  
  
  
We see this very clearly in my own portfolio of communications. The rise of
the Internet, which became commercial, I suppose, 20 years ago and has
gathered more and more momentum and more and more coverage, has revolutionised
the communications world and the media world. Our laws and regulations and
assumptions were all based around a series of platforms: newspapers,
magazines, licensed broadcasters in radio and television, subscription
television whether on cable or satellite. These great platforms were the only
means by which people could communicate to the mass market. They were the
gatekeepers and they posed huge barriers to competition. Then the Internet
came along and devastated all of that. It provided a very cost-effective
platform for advertising and so undermined significantly, materially, the
business model of newspapers, particularly those like the big metropolitan
broadsheets of yesteryear, which depended on classified advertising. It takes
on subscription television. People now can buy the programs, download the
programs they want to watch when they want to watch them from the Internet.
They do not have to buy a bundled package. Netflix arises to take on all of
the cable TV companies in the United States and it has many imitators around
the world. So these are revolutionary times.  
  
We have all been very concerned especially about the damage to the newspaper
business, not because any of us I hope are so naive as to be filled with a
particular affection for newspapers or journalists as a group or proprietors
as a group or shareholders of newspapers—all businesses have to deal with the
travails of the world and adapt to them. But newspapers and journalists have a
very fundamental role to play in our democracy, or I should say journalism
does. The work that journalists do in a free media is just as important as any
work that we do here in this chamber or in the other place as legislators or
that the judiciary do or that the Public Service do in running the country. We
cannot be a democracy without a free media. So the concern naturally was that
as the resources were drained away from those newspapers which had been the
big foundations of journalism so the quality of our democracy would diminish
as the quality of journalism and the number of journalists, the resources
available to journalism, were diminished too. That has been a matter of very
real concern.  
  
What we have also seen with the arrival of the Internet is an opening up of
competition on a scale that would have previously been unimaginable. If you
think back 20 or 30 years, the idea of there being new newspapers to compete
with the Sydney Morning Herald, the Age, the Daily Telegraph or the Melbourne
Herald Sun was fanciful. Every now and then some rich person would try and
start their own newspaper to take on one of the established ones but it was
generally a very unsuccessful effort. I am thinking of Lang Hancock in Perth
and Robert Holmes a Court for a period. But what the Internet has done is
lowered the cost of entry into the media market. So the same time as we have
been lamenting the demise of the great beasts of the media jungle we have seen
more competition than ever. We have seen The Guardian Online, we have seen The
Mail Online. We have seen the paper I launched on Friday, Morry Schwartz's
Saturday Paper, and so many others—a host of them, too many to name. We have
never had more competition and more diversity in our media world than we have
today. Yet it is remarkable that under the previous government their obsession
was with the technological constructs of the past. They said, 'Rupert
Murdoch's News Corporation has the majority share of metropolitan daily
newspaper circulation.' So it has had, for nearly 30 years since a Labor
government enabled Mr Murdoch to buy the Herald and Weekly Times group. But
that share of the total media and information pie represented by newspapers is
getting smaller and smaller as more and more competitors come onto the scene.  
  
Yet it was precisely at that time—when a media landscape that had been frozen
for decades suddenly started to thaw and was open to so much competition—that
the Labor government wanted to constrain freedom and regulate the media in a
way it had never been regulated before in peacetime.  
  
So there is a fundamental difference between the way I am approaching this
portfolio of communications and, indeed, the way the government is approaching
this area and its Labor predecessor. Labor believed that the arrival of the
Internet required more regulation and less freedom. We say that the arrival of
the Internet enables much more competition and therefore more freedom and that
therefore there is a need for less regulation not more. You could not have a
starker difference between our government and its predecessor, and the
difference is that we believe in freedom.  
  
I note in passing that some commentators on the Conservative or the right wing
side of political debate have criticised me for launching Morry Schwartz's new
paper The Saturday Paper on Friday. They apparently would like me to be—just
as Senator Conroy was the minister for left wing communications or the
minister for communications that agree with the Labor Party—the minister for
right-wing communications or communications that agree with the Liberal Party.
And that is not the case. I am the Minister for Communications. I am the
minister that seeks to ensure that we have the freest and most diverse media
we can possibly manage. I am the minister that wants to take away the barriers
to competition wherever I can so that as many voices can speak out as
possible, and whether they are left or right is of no concern to me in my
capacity as the Minister for Communications. As the member for Wentworth
seeking re-election I may be disappointed if the anti-Liberal forces in the
media urge that I should not to be re-elected, fair enough—that will be
distressing at election time. But in my ministerial capacity and in my role as
the custodian of this vital portfolio in the government, my job is to stand up
for freedom. Those who think that this Liberal minister should be like Senator
Conroy and seek to persecute or suborn or bully those who do not agree with
him have got it completely wrong—they are wrong in principle and they are
wrong in practice. Everybody has a vested interest in freedom—everybody.
Whether you are on the right or on the left you have a vital, vested interest
in freedom. As I said in one brief comment on the weekend to one of these
critics, mangling Bill Clinton: 'It's the democracy, stupid!' It's the
democracy—that's what we are committed to.  
  
You see another example of the Labor Party's big government obsession in their
approach to broadband. The fundamental failure and mistake of the previous
government—and it was a fundamental one and one that is impossible to reverse
at this juncture—was to be genuinely mad enough to imagine that the government
was the right agency to build a new telecommunications network. It was back to
the days of the Postmaster General. Every other comparable country in the
world in approaching the challenge of getting broadband services upgraded has
done this: they have encouraged the private sector to do the job. They have
provided judicious subsidies to ensure that people in remote or regional areas
have their services upgraded where it otherwise would not be commercial to do
so. And the virtue of that is that it ensures that the government was up for a
certain amount of money, a sum certain. And all of the execution and
construction risk, and the business risk, was left with the private sector. An
excellent example of that—you do not have to look very far—is what John Key
did in New Zealand, or, indeed, what the British Government has has done in
the UK. There is a very long list. So the craziness of the previous
government's policy was right from the jump, having the hubris, in defiance of
experience both in Australia and everywhere else, to imagine that the
government was the best party to do the job. So, in Australia, in the
socialist paradise of Senator Conroy and Julia Gillard and Kevin Rudd , we had
a situation where the execution and business risk of this vast project was
entirely vested in the government, in the taxpayer, in other words, and the
only people who got the cheque and have the certainty were in fact the
telephone companies, Telstra and Optus, who sold their assets to the
government—an extraordinary failure.  
  
So it is no surprise that the project has run late. It has run over budget.
Indeed, as Ziggy Switkowski observed, just last week, so far the NBN Co. has
invested $6.4 billion of taxpayers' money and in its fibre rollout passed less
than two per cent of the country.  
  
The challenge that we have is that we are not in a position to turn back the
clock. We are not in a position to undo all of the mistakes the Labor Party
has made. So what we have to do is to mitigate the madness and to try to
complete the project as quickly and cheaply and hence as affordably as
possible. As I said in question time, one of the consequences of the Labor
Party's approach of course would have been, had it been persevered with, that
broadband prices would have been up to 80 per cent higher. There is no magic
in that; there is nothing unusual in that: if you have a massively expensive,
overcapitalised government monopoly, with no competition to keep it honest,
you are going to get very high prices. You do not get cheap prices by
overcapitalising a business, especially one that is a monopoly.  
  
I noticed earlier, the member for McEwen speaking about his electorate and
saying that people have been moving away because of lack of broadband.  
  
He should really raise that with his colleagues, because in six years of Labor
virtually nothing was done. There was the best part of two million premises
without access to broadband in 2007, and there has only been a tiny chip into
that in the intervening six years.  
  
And then, I might say, with a chutzpah that is quite epic, he went on to
complain that there were mobile phone black spots in his electorate. No doubt
there are, and that is one of the reasons why the coalition government, the
Abbott government, has allocated $100 million to address them—or to address as
many as we can with that sum of money. But it is worth noting that in six
years of the Labor government not one cent was spent to fix mobile black
spots.  
  
It is the same point about regional and remote broadband subsidies, in areas
where there is no mobile phone reception. As we all know, this is by far the
biggest complaint—as you would know in particular, Deputy Speaker, from your
electorate of Maranoa—and by far the biggest telecommunications concern in
rural and regional Australia. In those areas, of course, because of the small
population, it is not necessarily economic for the telcos to make the
investment, so there is a role for government, but in six years not one cent
was spent by Labor on upgrading or addressing mobile phone black spots. But,
to date, $6.4 billion has been invested by the NBN in passing less than two
per cent of premises in Australia.  
  
I have spoken earlier about the other critical issue, but it bears repeating.
It is this issue of affordability. It is no good having the best broadband
technology in the world, which enables a household of six to engage in
simultaneous high-definition interactive cybergaming across the world—there is
no point having that—if battlers cannot afford it.  
  
Mr Husic interjecting—  
  
Mr TURNBULL: The member for Chifley is interjecting away there because he does
not like to know the truth. The truth is that there are many people in his
electorate who cannot afford broadband today, and he in his hubris has turned
his back on them and supported a broadband policy that will make broadband
less affordable than it is today. Forty-one per cent of the least well off
households, the lowest income households, the households with the lowest 20
per cent of income in Australia, do not have access to the Internet at home.
Four per cent of the top 20 per cent do. What do you reckon the difference is?
I think it is all about affordability, don't you? You do not have to be a
rocket scientist to work that out. And yet, there was Labor—in a manner
calculated, inevitably—determined to make broadband less affordable than it
already is. That was the inevitable consequence, as night follows day. If you
overcapitalise a business and you render it immune from competition, that will
result in higher prices. There is no alternative.  
  
And that is the critical objective of our government when it comes to the NBN:
to get this project finished, to ensure that people everywhere have access to
very fast broadband, using the mix of technologies—in common with all of the
other major developed countries: the United States, the UK, Germany, Belgium,
France; take your pick—that will ensure that we have a broadband network that
is built nearly four years sooner and $32 billion less expensively and, above
all, to make it more affordable.  
  
Labor's arrogant indifference to the position of the people that they claim to
represent, the least well off Australians, is truly chilling. It really is
truly chilling. Labor's policy would result in average broadband prices
increasing by $43 a month, increasing by up to 80 per cent a month. That is
the fact. They can run around, wave their arms and talk about gigabits and
gigabytes. They can do all of that. They can talk about all these things,
which most of them do not understand. And yet the bottom line is this, and we
all know it, whether we are in big business or little business: you give the
Labor Party a project like this to manage and they will make a hash of it. You
overcapitalise a government monopoly and you will get higher prices, and the
consequence is that a vital service which has been unaffordable for many to
date will become unaffordable to many more in the future.