Well thank you very much and Kung Hei Fat Choi.  
  
Ladies and Gentlemen, I was really touched by the comments that were made
earlier about the wonderful characteristics of people born in the Year of the
Horse, because I was born in the Year of the Horse, but as John Alexander is
giving me a quizzical look there the Member for Bennelong, but John I’m a very
old horse. But my parents must have known it was the Year of the Horse because
they called me Mal-Colm so that was very appropriate that they picked that up.  
  
It’s a great pleasure for me to be here, it’s wonderful to be here with so
many dear Friends, with Allen Lee and Simon Chan from ACCA. With so many of
our Parliamentary colleagues, your representatives, and Gladys Berejiklian,
the Minister for Transport, said to me just a little while ago, “Don’t mention
anybody’s name, don’t mention anybody’s name.” And Gladys, I’m not going to
mention anybody’s name except for you! And what a wonderful job Gladys is
doing as Transport Minister for the State. Ladies and Gentlemen I have to just
acknowledge Matt Thistlethwaite and he’s representing Bill Shorten, the Leader
of the Opposition. I’m also representing Tony Abbot the Prime Minster who
sends his best wishes.  
  
  
  
Can I just say how we’ve got a very, very distinguished parliamentarian here
with his beautiful wife Heather. Phillip Ruddock. Now Phillip Ruddock, I don’t
want to make Phillip blush, I don’t want to make him blush though it would
offset the white hair beautifully, can I just say to you there is nobody in
the public life today who has done more to promote multiculturalism in
Australian than Phillip Ruddock, the multicultural society in which we live,
which I believe, my friends is our greatest strength. Our greatest strength is
not in the minerals underground, it’s not in the broad acres, it is in the men
and women who walk around in Australia in our diversity. Our greatest strength
is our multiculturalism and ACCA’s work in the Chinese community is an
indelible part of that.  
  
Our nation is like a magnificent tapestry and every single one of our
community groups and our ethnic groups and our cultural traditions, woven into
that, is an indelible part of our nation and there is no group that has made a
greater contribution, a more indelible one, than the Chinese community.  
  
You could not imagine modern Australia today without the Chinese community.
And frankly, David Coleman, the new Member for Banks, he wouldn’t be in the
Parliament if it hadn’t been for so much support from the Chinese community.
He’s very pleased too. He said thank god for Allen, he’s very grateful to your
friends in Hurstville. Laurie Ferguson - there is another great friend in the
Parliament of the Chinese community.  
  
Can I just say, we are at the verge of an even deeper and greater relationship
with China. We are partners now – China is one of our largest trading
partners. China, a country that if we go back 40 years or so, Australia didn’t
even recognise. We had no diplomatic relations. They didn’t recognise us, we
didn’t recognise them. What an extraordinary transformation. And the lesson
for all of us is that openness, trade, diversity, multiculturalism, tolerance,
these are the things that define prosperous societies.  
  
And while China is a dramatically different society to Australia, we should
never forget that though it was Mao Tse-tung that asserted Chinese sovereignty
and said in 1949, “Zhong guo ren min zanqilai le” and certainly the Chinese
people did stand up.  
  
But what has made the Chinese people stand up taller and stronger than ever
before, was a less dramatic Chinese leader, Deng Xiao Ping, who went south and
took the example of the Chinese admiral, Zheng He, who set sail across the
Indian Ocean, and opened up China to trade, only to have it shut down by a
very foolish Emperor, and then China became closed. It was Deng Xiao Ping who
said, “When China was open to the world we were strong, when we became closed
we became weak, and we became victimised and conquered”.  
  
He opened up China to the world, and as China becomes more open, as our trade
becomes more intense, our relations become more engaged, our two nations
become stronger and stronger. I want to congratulate you all for the great
work you’re doing in the Chinese community, congratulate ACCA, and say long
life and a prosperous year for all of us, Chinese Australians, all
Australians, in this very auspicious year of the horse. Thank you all very
much.  
  
This is the year, just as on St Patrick’s day everyone can say “Hor sur mah
ren”! Thank you very much!