I am very honoured to speak here tonight at Chatham House, the home of the
Royal Institute of International Affairs.  
  
Chatham House has been at the forefront of policy debate on international
affairs ever since it was established in the wake of the 1919 Paris Peace
Conference and in the decades that followed every major international issue
has found a thoughtful and constructive chamber of debate and ideas here in St
James.  
  
There is always no shortage of challenges and crises claiming our attention.
But there are few as important as the debate about the governance of the
Internet, a debate which Richard Haas from your Manhattan counterpart, the
Council on Foreign Relations, has described as the most significant strategic
issue in 2014.  
  
The Internet has transformed the world.  
  
It has transformed us.  
  
Before the Internet and for all of human history, the default was always to
forget. We had to go to great efforts to remember whether it was painting on a
cave wall, memorising ballads, writing, photographing.  
  
But now as more and more of our lives are lived or at least recorded on line,
in large part at our own initiative, is anything able to be forgotten? Things
can be overlooked, but can they ever be deleted?  
  
Our ideas of space and place are utterly transformed. In 1978 I went up to
Oxford as a Rhodes Scholar from Australia. Once there I had no news of
Australia beyond the occasional cricket score and whatever newspaper clippings
Lucy would include in our frequent correspondence. Telephone calls were far
too expensive except for emergencies.  
  
In 2001 our son Alex went to Harvard, only 23 years apart. Telephony was so
cheap it was almost free, email was free and he could read every Australian
newspaper, listen to Australian radio whenever he wished. In a generation that
whole experience of travelling abroad to study had been irrevocably
transformed.  
  
One industry after another, one job after another that felt it was immune from
foreign competition has become trade exposed. Greater competition has come
with greater opportunities.  
  
Rupert Murdoch predicted ruefully in the late 90s that the Internet would
destroy more profitable businesses than it would create, and that may be true
for his own empire, but overall the Internet has created so much opportunity –
economic, social, intellectual, political than could ever have been imagined.  
  
We are on the verge of a world in most people, and not just in the developed
world, are connected to the Internet and hence at least potentially to each
other 24/7 with a smart phone just like the one we all have in our pockets
tonight.  
  
There is no institution or infrastructure more important to the future
prosperity and freedom of our global community than the Internet.  
  
And in what should be a humbling lesson for politicians and governments, this
Internet has grown almost entirely without the direction or control of any
government.  
  
This is not to say that it was developed, like the British Empire was
acquired, in an absence of mind, but rather that while it had its origins with
the research programmes of the US Department of Defence which led to the
ARPANET, the role of the US Government since then has been admirably hands
off.  
  
Before I delve a little into the detail of the IANA function and the future of
ICANN, let me say, at least on behalf of our own Government, how indebted we
are to the United States not simply for its role in establishing the Internet
but above all in its restraint culminating as we know in the recent decision
of the US Government to finally withdraw entirely from any role in the
technical governance of the Internet so long as the independence and freedom
of that administration of the domain name system from other governmental
control can be established.  
  
Our Government, like Britain’s, is committed to freedom on and of the
Internet. That means the governance of the Internet should not be in the hands
of any government or group or organisation of governments.  
  
And I should note that in my discussions today with the Secretary of State for
Culture, Media and Sport, Mr Sajid Javid, and the Minister for Culture,
Communications and Creative Industries, Mr Ed Vaizey we found ourselves
absolutely of the same mind on this question.  
  
We believe that ensuring that the architecture and administration of global
cyberspace remains free of government domination or control is one of the key
global strategic issues of our time.  
  
Rather like the House of Lords in Iolanthe, the role of the US Government in
the governance of the Internet has been to have “done nothing in particular
but do it very well.”  
  
The central contractual role of the National Telecommunications and
Information Administration (NTIA) in the management of key internet domain
name functions has in practice amounted to the retention of no more than
reserve powers, providing an umbrella of security and confidence as the
internet community, or to use the current inelegant jargon, the global multi-
stakeholder community, continued to demonstrate its ability to manage the
domain name system equitably and efficiently in the interests of the world,
not just one nation or one interest group..  
  
In purely technical terms, it’s a role that has basically been nothing more
than a rubber stamp between the policy and implementation mechanisms encoded
elsewhere within the system; a checks and balance trigger, a relatively small
function in the scheme of things but a big symbol, and a big area of
international focus.  
  
So the question becomes: if we remove an important power, albeit one never
exercised, that acted as an external check on ICANN’s power and processes do
we replace it with another? Or do we focus on ICANN’s internal governance
mechanisms and ensure they are sufficient and robust, so that some form of
external mechanism is no longer needed at all?  
  
Should, for example, the community be looking for ways to structurally
separate the policy, implementation and oversight functions within ICANN, or
are other internal governance mechanisms needed?  
  
There seem to me to be two separate but related issues here. The first is one
of confidence, capability, accountability – in other words can ICANN be
trusted to continue to do the job of administering the DNS or will the removal
of the reserve power of the NTIA contract cause it to run of the rails and if
so who will pull it back?  
  
The second question is that of legitimacy. Why does ICANN have the right to
undertake this function? And who is ICANN? It is fine to say in a breezy sort
of way that it represents the global community of the Internet – the multi-
stakeholder system – but how can we be sure that the board of ICANN is fairly
representative of that community and if the Internet belongs to the world
shouldn’t there be a more formal accountability.  
  
The great virtue of the NTIA contract was that the United States Government
being both the founder of the Internet (in many respects) conferred
legitimacy. The weakness has been of course that some other countries
suspected the US Government’s role was a controlling one and of course this
anxiety has been greatly exacerbated by the Snowden revelations.  
  
Of course, internet governance is not government; but there are important
lessons to be learned from the way in which the parliamentary system of
government practiced in Britain and Australia has, without a highly
prescriptive constitution, provided a culture where fundamental principles of
accountability, democracy, freedom of speech, rule of law among others are
developed and maintained. The organic, as opposed to prescriptive, nature of
our political culture is its greatest strength..  
  
Any new governance arrangements within ICANN must not only be similarly robust
and sustainable, they must encourage, promote and allow development and
evolution. This is one of the strengths of ICANN’s current Affirmation of
Commitment with the US, which provides for the periodic and ongoing review of
key governance mechanisms within ICANN, including review of its accountability
and transparency arrangements, with a view to continuous improvement.  
  
Whether this needs to be replaced by something new, either at the same time as
the IANA transition or separately, is an open question. However, as with the
IANA transition, we should be focusing on the underlying goals rather than
being constrained by the current model.  
  
The NTIA announcement is one small step in the inevitable and necessary
evolution. Does it create a power vacuum? No. On the contrary, the US
Government’s announcement can be seen as a significant vote of confidence in
ICANN’s maturity, and acknowledgement of a successful evolutionary process.  
  
It seems to me that as to the first question, that of capacity and
accountability, the answer is simply that ICANN has demonstrated that the
multi-stakeholder system has worked and that if there are refinements they
probably lie in greater transparency and accountability. As far as legitimacy
is concerned, it seems to me that the legitimacy of the multi-stakeholder
system is derived from the fact of its successful operation. It is not a
system or structure that would be designed by constitutional theorists, but it
works.  
  
We should think about this task not as though we were designing a political
system but rather contributing to the development of an ecosystem, one that
will sustain itself and evolve for decades to come.  
  
Global Commission of Internet Governance  
  
It’s not an easy task, and I applaud Chatham House for fully involving the
international community in the Global Commission of Internet Governance. In
taking leadership, the Global Commission is addressing four key themes.  
  
I would like to reflect for a moment on the preservation of innovation which
in this case includes critical internet resources, infrastructure and
competition policy.  
  
Innovation by its very nature is disruptive, it destroys and replaces as it
reinvigorates and reinvents. That’s a good thing; it’s the natural order of
change and renewal. But it’s not enough to simply preserve innovation; we need
to stimulate innovation... change... even if that means the multi-stakeholder
model of internet governance ends up being expressed in a completely new form.  
  
At the end of the day, this is a basically a contest between those who believe
the Internet should be based on an open, free market participatory principle
and those who believe it is a decentralised artefact that should be reined in
and made subject to centralised control.  
  
We should be aiming to ensure that any changes continue to stimulate
innovation that strengthens the multi-stakeholder model with new devices, new
methodologies. A key challenge will be how to evolve key internet governance
organisations without their losing their multi-stakeholder and private-sector
led character.  
  
Trust and Privacy  
  
For those who see the internet as benign agent of social and economic good, it
is that. For others, whose motives are suspect at best, evil at worst, it is a
strategic domain to be seized and controlled with all of us marked as
potential victims in one form or another.  
  
The internet, as with the physical world, is whatever someone, some nation,
wants it to be ... it’s both a global village and a Wild West.  
  
The focus on the governance of the internet parallels a rise in suspicion,
supercharged by the Snowden revelations. Their shadow has cast a long pall.
Many citizens have lost faith in the activities of their governments.
Governments have lost faith in each other and corporations are losing faith in
governments.  
  
But any mistrust of the multi-stakeholder model of internet governance is
absolutely misplaced in this context, given espionage and surveillance is not
connected to the governance of the Internet; its open architecture
agnostically enables all those seeking access, legitimately or not.  
  
Put another way the governance issues we are discussing today relate to the
all important plumbing of the Internet and should not be confused with the
content or practices that use that plumbing.  
  
This year is a watershed moment for the Internet with world attention focussed
as the debate ramps up at forums around the globe.  
  
Brazil’s global multi stakeholder meeting on the future of governance held
last week resulted in a series of internet governance principles that cover
issues such as observing human rights online, cultural and linguistic
diversity and a roadmap for the future evolution of the internet governance
ecosystem.  
  
Two representatives from my Department have just returned from the NetMundial
meeting in Brazil. I am pleased to report that the statement that came out of
NetMundial – officially titled ‘The Multistakeholder Statement of San Paulo”
provides a fresh statement of policy that places a far more equal emphasis on
the role of all stakeholders in the Internet governance landscape: national
governments, civil society, academia, technical groups and users. The
statement represents a clear and useful line in the sand for advocating the
continued evolution of the multi-stakeholder model: it may see the world’s
conversation about internet governance leave behind the old Manichaean
dualities of government versus non-government stakeholders, or of ICANN versus
ITU. The starting point for a dialogue on internet governance may now be
constellations of different stakeholders, contributing their diverse expertise
and strengths to a greater whole, without needing to usurp, co-opt or diminish
each others’ roles. In this respect, NetMundial represents an important
recognition of the success of a multistakeholder model of Internet governance.  
  
Conclusion  
  
The Australian Government certainly does not have all the answers, and no one
nation possibly could. It will take a genuinely global response to a genuinely
global issue. In among the conflicting visions and agendas I am confident we
will find a way through. Or the way through will find us.  
  
Not one of us could have ever imagined what the internet would become, just as
none of us can envisage where it will go. Its growth has been organic and any
future governance structure needs to honour and build on that.  
  
The Internet has a spirit that must not, and it is to be hoped cannot, be
broken. It must never be controlled, with the power and ownership that is
inherent in that, but it must be governed well. By all and for all.  
  
Forums such as this one today are part of the global dialogue that is
invaluable in supporting ICANN’s transition to a new model of governance under
which the Internet remains free, stable and resilient.  
  
I congratulate and thank Chatham House for the lead it is taking to that end.  
  
[ends].