Thank you Gary Nairn, it is a pleasure to be here for Locate15 and I thank the
Spatial Industries Business Association (SIBA), the Survey and Spatial
Sciences Institute (SSSI) and the Geospatial Information and Technology
Association (GITA) for organising this important event.  
  
It is fantastic to see the industry working together to deliver this annual
conference.  
  
Opening remarks  
  
Today I want to talk to you about the importance of making data openly
available to enable innovation.  
  
It is fitting that Locate15 is being held in Queensland’s capital, Brisbane,
as Queensland has shown great leadership in the areas of open data and
innovation  
  
The development of the Queensland Globe, a world-first application enabling
the public to access the State’s datasets and satellite imagery is one
example.  
  
Building on the success of the Queensland Globe, the State Government and the
Queensland University of Technology have formed a dynamic and powerful
partnership that has led to the creation of the Cube Globe.  
  
At nearly two storeys tall, the Cube Globe is the world’s largest digital
interactive installation and was used during the G20 Summit late last year –
allowing delegates and visitors to interact with and explore statistics, case
studies and other spatial information about Queensland[1].  
  
Queensland is also home to Australia’s first Open Data Institute, which has
been established to link all sectors of the economy and nurture an open data
culture and capability.  
  
Research institutions, industry and academia have partnered with the Institute
to realise the opportunities presented by open data - to drive economic,
social and environmental prosperity[2].  
  
Last August, I spoke at the GovHack red carpet awards night, which was hosted
here in Brisbane.  
  
One of the local Brisbane teams - AussieMon - built an online game based on
Pokemon, but which uses Australian animals and in the process educates young
people about them. Another team built an app for Google glass so that when you
put on the glasses, you see your surrounds as they were 100 years ago, using
historic photos and materials sourced from various government agencies[3].  
  
As I said on that night, there are few things I find more inspiring than
watching a group of young coders - some of them barely old enough to be in
high school - working on the next app or program that will improve peoples’
lives.  
  
The most scarce resource in the digital age is not access to capital or
technology itself. The scarcest resource is imagination - disruptive,
insurgent, radical imagination.  
  
And that is why events like this are so important. It does take cultural
change - particularly from governments - to harness the ideas and the
creativity that you see in those young hackers I met at GovHack.  
  
The future is not something we should seek to 'proof' ourselves against -
change and uncertainty are things that we should embrace. We must be open to
new challenges and, most importantly, we must be flexible and agile, treating
volatility as an opportunity not a threat.  
  
Role of government  
  
Governments have an important role to play in driving innovation across the
economy.  
  
Of course we must get the fundamentals right to ensure that all levers, be
they taxation or investment in research, education and infrastructure, are
pulling in the same direction.  
  
To capitalise on the opportunities of innovation and productivity, we must
continue to build our knowledge and proficiency in science, technology,
engineering and maths to compete in an increasingly competitive, globalised
and trade-exposed world.  
  
But we must also lead by example – to get in there and innovate ourselves by
delivering our services online in a compelling and engaging way.  
  
If we are serious about promoting the benefits of digital innovation, as a
government we need to improve the quality and availability of our own
services.  
  
This includes opening up and releasing government data that would otherwise
only be collecting dust in digital cupboards.  
  
Digital Transformation Office  
  
That is why the Prime Minister and I recently announced that we will be
establishing a Digital Transformation Office (DTO) - to improve the quality
and availability of government services and to ensure that all major services
can be completed digitally from start to finish by 2017.  
  
There really is no reason why the quality of government services like applying
for a tax file number or renewing a passport should be any different to
Internet banking on your phone or tablet, for example.  
  
So the DTO really is all about not only improving the availability of digital
services but also designing services that are of such high quality that users
actually seek them out. And of course data will play an important role in the
service delivery transformation, particularly spatial data and analysis which
will be used to deliver better targeted services to users.  
  
Open data agenda  
  
We have very ambitious targets when it comes to our open data agenda.  
  
We need to begin with the assumption that spatially referenced data collected
by or for the public sector is a public good[4].  
  
I am sure many of you are aware of the 2014 report by Lateral Economics which
suggests that “more vigorous open data policies could add around $16 billion
per annum to the Australian economy”[5].  
  
Governments hold an extraordinary amount of unique data, collected directly
and indirectly in the course of doing our job. It is there. We have it.  
  
But there is no point in keeping all that data stored away. It needs to be
accessed, analysed, understood, used and reused.  
  
Since the Government was elected, the number of datasets available on
data.gov.au has increased from 514 to more than 5200: a tenfold increase.  
  
Approximately 70 per cent of these open datasets are spatial[6]  
  
But the Government’s open data focus is not just about opening more and more
datasets.  
  
It is also about opening high-value datasets - those that are sought after by
the developer community.  
  
Efforts to realise the open data agenda  
  
As outlined in our election commitment, we need a deeper consultation with the
private sector and community organisations to identify public datasets that
are not currently published on data.gov.au  
  
We have made some progress with the addition of a ‘Request Data’ function on
the data.gov.au website.  
  
But there’s more we can do. I am very pleased to announce today the launch of
the Open Data 500 Australia initiative.  
  
This collaboration between the Australian Government and GovLab, a team of
researchers at New York University, will produce a landmark study of the
Australian open government data.  
  
Open Data 500 will be a comprehensive survey that will look at Australian
companies that use public datasets to generate new business, develop new
products and services or create social value.  
  
The study will provide a basis for assessing the social and economic value of
open government datasets and identify the types of data most valuable to
businesses.  
  
Similar studies have been undertaken in the US and Mexico.  
  
Open Data 500 advances the government’s policy of increasing the number of
high value public datasets in Australia in an effort to drive productivity and
innovation, as well as its commitment to greater consultation with private
sector stakeholders on open data.  
  
This study will help ensure the focus of government is on the publication of
high-value datasets, with an emphasis on quality rather than quantity.  
  
It will:  
  
● provide a basis for assessing the economic value of using open government
data; and  
  
● identify ways businesses can reduce costs associated with the licencing,
versioning, control, storage and maintenance of data.  
  
I strongly encourage Australian companies using open data as a business or
operation resource to take part in the Open Data 500 study. Information on how
to participate can be found at www.opendata500.com/au  
  
The Australian Government’s Open Data Network and the NationalMap  
  
This builds on our existing initiatives including the Open Data Network which
is an initiative that the government has used to deliver the substantial
increase of open data and functionality currently available through
data.gov.au.  
  
The Open Data Network, put simply, is a range of measures that make the
data.gov.au site easier to use, both for agencies and end-users.  
  
It provides centralised search and display layers that enable agencies to
focus on data release and quality, rather than focussing on building new
presentation platforms.  
  
The inclusion of open government data from all levels of Australian government
provides for the first time a demonstration of how seamless open data
exploitation can be achieved.  
  
The platform is now entirely open-source, meaning it is easy for anyone in the
private sector to take that information and exploit it.  
  
Geocoded address data  
  
At last years’ Locate Conference I talked about our efforts to make quality
geocoded address data openly available for use under open data terms.  
  
Access to national geocoded address data is still limited and in my view this
is curtailing Australia’s private and public sectors in their business
processes and decision-making  
  
My department is continuing to work collaboratively with our industry and
state and territory colleagues in an effort to bring this complex public
policy initiative to a resolution. And I hope to have good news on this front
soon.  
  
Open GPS infrastructure  
  
Not only are we reliant on GPS more and more in our daily lives from banking
to mobile applications, but there is a growing economic dependence on precise
positioning systems to underpin efficient transportation, geospatial data
management, and industrial automation.  
  
Open access to GPS has been estimated to contribute at least US$90 billion in
value to the US economy each year.  
  
Australia has access to many more international space programs, including
satellite navigation system projects, due to our unique position on the earth.  
  
The Australian Government is working, through the Department of Industry, to
leverage these open big data opportunities by ensuring the country’s national
coordinate framework and national positioning infrastructure is fit-for-
purpose and globally compatible for all positioning applications.  
  
And Australia continues to lead the contemporary research in global and
regional navigation satellite systems with the work being undertaken in
Program 1 (Positioning) of the Cooperative Research Centre for Spatial
Information.  
  
This work demonstrates how to integrate signals from GPS, Beidou (China),
GLONASS (Russia), Galileo (Europe) and QZSS (Japan) and providing centimetre
accurate positioning in doing so.  
  
Last month, this Program also demonstrated the role that QZSS can play in
communicating directly with a driverless tractor at Jerilderie in New South
Wales to conduct tillage and spraying operations while controlling the course
of the tractor to within five centimetres of true.  
  
Currently no other positioning satellite constellation has a communication AND
positioning capability like this Japanese satellite.  
  
The Japanese funded this research under a program established by my colleague
the Hon Ian Macfarlane, Minister for Industry and Science, and Mr Yoshitaka
Shindo, the then Minister for Internal Affairs and Communications of Japan.  
  
A promising development with this research is the possibility that Australia
will need less communications infrastructure to support precise positioning
applications in regional Australia potentially realising savings for
government and users alike.  
  
Australian studies have estimated that if we can harness all the signals from
these various positioning satellites we could add up to $32 billion over 20
years to the Australian economy, a contribution of up to $7 billion to GDP.  
  
Collaboration with states and territories, industry and academia  
  
In the spatial context, success in delivering on the open data agenda depends
on collaboration between governments, industry and academia.  
  
I would like to acknowledge the efforts of the spatial sector in leading the
open data charge.  
  
These efforts are all the more impressive in light of the sheer complexity of
a sector in which both governments and industry can be both suppliers and
customers.  
  
All jurisdictions, including the Commonwealth, collaborate through ANZLIC to
provide crucial spatially referenced data, and the Foundation Spatial Data
Framework continues to mature both in concept and delivery.  
  
Industry plays a crucial role in developing innovative ways to meet the needs
of the mobile digital market, and delivering products to benefit the
Australian economy.  
  
The role of academia is equally important, using the available data to conduct
meaningful and insightful research, and help make Australia an internationally
competitive research hub.  
  
Our policy position on the open data agenda is to make more location data open
by default, unless access is restricted to protect privacy, public safety,
security and commercial confidentiality.  
  
We want location data openly available at no charge to the end user, except
where cost recovery is warranted for specialised services.  
  
And we want location data published in formats that promote its use and reuse,
and under open licensing arrangements.  
  
Several high value datasets either have been or will be opened shortly
including the LANDSAT Archive; Broadband coverage and speed; the Australian
Business Register; the Mobile Black Spots Dataset; the Budget and the complete
Administrative Boundaries of Australia.  
  
The spatial sector has made great strides towards realising this open data
agenda.  
  
I call on the sector to continue to provide leadership, because more remains
to be done to ensure the positive impact of spatially-referenced data is
realised.  
  
Closing remarks  
  
In data, and particularly spatially-referenced data, we have a valuable
resource at our fingertips - a resource that’s akin to the coming of the first
ancient maps in the new insights and direction it can offer in a globalised
world.  
  
It is there for the exploiting, to be mined and harnessed, although it’s
probably fair to say we don’t yet comprehend the full extent of the benefits
it can deliver.  
  
That’s what this event is about; exploring the opportunities in this rapidly
expanding industry.  
  
I wish you all a useful and informative few days.  
  
Thank you.