Thank you very much.  
  
As-salaam-alaykum, Peace Be Upon You and good evening to all of you gathered
here tonight on this very special occasion.  
  
I am honoured to be the first Australian Prime Minister to host an Iftar
during the holy month of Ramadan. To the approximately 500,000 Muslim
Australians across our country and to the more than 1.5 billion Muslims around
the world - Ramadan Kareem!  
  
The sacred month of Ramadan serves as a season of reflection, forgiveness and
spiritual renewal. During the course of this month, Muslims will fast, take no
food or water between dawn and sunset, in order to refocus their minds on
faith and redirect their hearts to charity, so that they can understand the
lives and experience of those who are less fortunate than them.  
  
It is a special time of service and support for those in need and it’s also a
time to join with family and friends in celebration of our common humanity.  
  
Tonight we gather as a community of many faiths and cultures to get to know
one another and share in the spirit of Ramadan. I am delighted that we are
joined tonight not only by so many outstanding Muslim Australians but
Australians of many faiths – including Christians, Jews, Hindus, Sikhs and
Buddhists.  
  
I see tonight the Archbishop of Sydney, with whom only last night we
remembered the victims of the Orlando killings in his church, St Andrews
Cathedral. There in a beautiful service where he preached so well, so
eloquently, and there in a congregation with men and women of many faiths just
as we have tonight.  
  
Strong in our solidarity, strong in our common humanity, strong in standing up
against hatred and the people that seek to divide us.  
  
By breaking bread, by sharing food across religions and by bringing diverse
people of diverse backgrounds together, we embody Islam’s emphasis on the
diversity of humanity, illustrated in this Quranic verse which you all know
well and is much quoted, because it is very profound:  
  
“Mankind we created you from a single pair of a male and female, and made you
into nations and tribes so that you might come to know one another.”  
  
Tonight we also acknowledge the remarkable contribution that Muslims have made
to Australian society – ours the most successful multicultural society in the
world. From the Makassan fishermen who traded with our first Australians in
the 1600s, to the Afghan camel drivers who opened up the interior of our vast
continent. And to the teachers, artists, business leaders, public servants,
community leaders, journalists – every profession and calling – oil engineers,
drilling engineers, like my companion on my table here tonight – we have every
calling represented.  
  
All of you make Australia what it is. Rich in our diversity, our great
strength. I especially want to recognise the young Muslim leaders who are here
tonight, many of whom are seated at my table here.  
  
They come from all walks of life, are breaking down barriers and making a real
contribution to enriching and strengthening our society. They represent a new
and dynamic generation of Muslim leadership in Australia who are shaping a
more prosperous and harmonious future for all Australians.  
  
I’ll say it again. We are the most successful and harmonious multicultural
society in the world. Our multicultural success is at the heart of our
national identity. It is intrinsic to our history and our character.  
  
There is a great value to be found in what we were just discussing a moment
ago, which I would describe as cultural curiosity.  
  
I’ve always been a very curious person. I’ve always believed that the cultural
background, the religion, the history of our friends and neighbours enriches
us.  
  
We are enriched by the diversity in the experience of others and of course
sharing food and drink here at this meal – sharing food across every culture –
is a profound experience. It’s a sign of friendship. It’s a sign of
engagement.  
  
In March this year, I visited the Islamic Museum of Australia and I
participated in a roundtable meeting with Muslim youth leaders at the Islamic
Council of Victoria. I was thrilled to meet such a talented and accomplished
group of young Australians, a number of whom are here tonight.  
  
I was inspired to hear about the extraordinary work that they’re doing in
serving the broader community. For example, Azmeena Hussain, a senior
associate at a major Melbourne law firm is also a director of the InTouch
Multicultural Centre Against Domestic Violence, an external advisor to the
Victorian Police and an AFL Multicultural Ambassador. There is also Maryum
Chaudhry, who founded the Islamic Council of Victoria’s Office for Women,
served as a commissioner at the Victorian Multicultural Commission,
represented Australia in official exchanges with Indonesia and Malaysia, and
is currently in the process of establishing a foundation to invest in
educational opportunities for youth leaders.  
  
At the same time, what was also clear at our meeting was these young
Australians’ ongoing anxiety about the backlash caused by the violent acts of
a small minority of extremists who defame and blaspheme against their faith,
and for which the entire Muslim community is often blamed.  
  
At the ICV we committed together, to work together in partnership, to ensure
we are a stronger and more united Australian family.  
  
I saw and heard first hand, devotion, patriotism and dedication to building
bridges of understanding. I applaud the role of those youth leaders who, like
so many others in the Muslim community, continue to uplift this nation and who
demonstrate the virtues of their faith in their daily lives.  
  
The aim of extremists, including those committing violence through a warped
and nihilist interpretation of religion is to divide us and to turn our
citizens against each other - but we will not let them win. Acts of terror
like Sunday’s massacre in Orlando are perpetrated to divide us along lines of
race, religion, sect and sexuality - but that kind of hatred and division must
not prevail. We must stand together like we do tonight as one Australian
family united against terrorism, racism, discrimination and violence.  
  
I want to reiterate something that I said to the Islamic Council of Victoria
in March - and that is to emphasise to each and every one of you that the
Australian Muslim community is valued and respected – and it is not confined
to a narrow security prism – you are an integral part of an Australian family
that rests on the essential foundation of mutual respect and understanding.
Every one of us is enriched by the culture and the faiths of our friends and
neighbours.  
  
Australians are not defined by religion or race; we are defined by a common
commitment to shared political values, democracy, freedom, the rule of law,
all underpinned of course by mutual respect.  
  
As citizens of this country, we all have a shared responsibility to
participate in improving our society. Our humanity and our destiny – each of
our destinies - are tied one to all the others.  
  
I want to offer you my thanks for taking the time to be here this evening. I
wish you all a very blessed Ramadan. The Prophet Muhammad once said: "He is
not a believer who lets himself be satiated while his neighbour goes hungry".  
  
So on that note, I think we should all continue to enjoy our delicious feast,
enjoy our fellowship and our friendship. Enjoy sharing our stories, our
passions, our history, our visions for our future, for Australia’s future.  
  
Because believe me, we are all part, all of us, all 24 million of us, every
faith, every background, every race, we are all part of an extraordinary
project.  
  
This is a blessed country. This is a remarkable country. This is, in a world
of discord and disharmony, in a world where there is so much hatred, this is a
country which has successfully built a society that is diverse, that is
multicultural and that is founded on mutual respect. When you distil that
concept of mutual respect, when you distil it right at the core, is the value
most important and closest to God and that is love. Our nation is built on a
foundation of mutual respect, love and respect, for our fellow Australians and
a love and respect for humanity.  
  
Thank you very much for being here tonight.  
  
