Mr TURNBULL (Wentworth—Minister for Communications) (20:09): I thank all
honourable members for their contribution to this debate on the Communications
Legislation Amendment (SBS Advertising Flexibility and Other Measures) Bill
2015, and I will now seek to sum up the debate to date. I must refer to the
contribution of the member for Greenway. Her rebuke of me for expressing a
view about the interviewing style of journalists on television and the
inappropriateness of my daring to comment on anything that occurred on public
television was still hanging in the air when she proceeded to give a fairly
forthright critique of the Struggle Street program on SBS. The reality is that
we are all—ministers, parliamentarians, citizens, adults, children,
anybody—entitled in a democracy to express our views about what happens on
television, just as we are entitled to express our views about what happens
here, and may it long be so.  
  
This bill, I stress to honourable members, does not change the current
restrictions on the overall amount of advertising per 24 hours that the SBS
has, and it does not represent any further commercialisation of the SBS. The
SBS is a hybrid model already—most of its revenue comes from the government,
and I will come to that in a moment, but it has an advertising component. What
we are seeking to do, while retaining the absolute number of minutes—120
minutes a day—is to give the SBS the flexibility to have not more than 10 in
any given hour which, as honourable members obviously apprehend, will mean
that they will run more than five minutes, which is their current hourly limit
during the more popular and prime time programs.  
  
It is very clear how we got here. During the six years of Labor government, as
I was saying to the House earlier today, for every $1 of additional revenue
the government received they spent $2. When we came into government we
inherited a growing mountain of debt and a budget that was deeply in deficit.
We have had to make savings, and in my own portfolio that includes savings at
the national broadcasters, the ABC and the SBS, which receive $1.4 billion
every year from the government. I asked the Department of Communications, my
department, to undertake an efficiency study to identify savings that could be
made by improving efficiencies in the back-of-house departments of the ABC and
the SBS; in other words, savings that could be made without reducing the
resources available for programming. It was very important from my point of
view to ensure that the public broadcasters were able to continue to deliver
the same quality content to the public but in a more efficient way. Savings
have been achieved, inspired by—if not entirely in accordance with—the study.  
  
One of the recommendations from the efficiency study was that advertising
flexibility be given to the SBS. In November last year I announced that the
national broadcasters will return $308 million in savings to the budget over
five years. This means the SBS's operating budget will be reduced by $25.2
million and, along with the revenue of $28.5 million generated as a result of
this bill, the SBS's total savings returned to the budget over the five-year
period amount to $53.7 million. In the short term this bill allows additional
advertising revenue to be directed towards meeting the government's efficiency
savings applied to the SBS from 1 July 2015, without affecting its
programming. If these advertising measures are not passed before the end of
this financial year the SBS will need to find other ways to achieve the
necessary savings, which it has indicated may involve reductions in
programming and services.  
  
In the longer term the government's intention from these changes is for the
SBS to become a stronger and more sustainable broadcaster. Advertising
flexibility strengthens the SBS by making it less dependent on government and
helps to secure its future and independence. It is not part of this
government's policy, but honourable members should be very well aware that for
many years there have been advocates on both sides of the House and right
through the television industry, and certainly at the ABC, that the SBS should
be folded into the ABC. That, of course, is something that the SBS is not very
keen on. Giving the SBS greater advertising flexibility, greater financial
independence, will help to secure its independence in the years ahead.  
  
It is anticipated that the SBS advertising measures will result in a total
increase in the SBS's advertising revenue of $28½ million over four years. In
later years, if SBS exceeds that run rate the additional revenue can be
directed towards delivering more distinctive and innovative content and
services in line with its charter responsibilities. I should note—because this
is important, given that the free-to-air commercial television broadcasters
have argued that this is a very bad development, a very bad proposal, because
it will result in some advertising dollars being taken from them—that the two
highest television results for SBS since it started to carry advertising in
2003 were $72.3 million in 2009-10 and $73.4 million in 2013-14, and these
were in large part due to the FIFA World Cup being broadcast. I contrast this
to the advertising revenue earned by commercial broadcasters, of $3.9 billion
in 2013-14.  
  
The reality is that the SBS's revenues are a very, very tiny part of the total
advertising revenues of the television industry. The additional advertising
revenue received by SBS is highly unlikely to have any material impact on the
advertising revenue of the commercial broadcasters. As I noted earlier, the
2013-14 figure of $73.4 million was a high point due to the FIFA World Cup. In
the previous year, without the FIFA World Cup, it was only $58 million. Free
TV, the commercial television stations' lobby group, claims that this proposal
will result in SBS earning $148 million over four years from 2015-16, or $37
million per annum. These are so optimistic that I would say that they border
on the fanciful. But even if one were to accept them, $37 million per annum
represents less than one per cent of the $3.9 billion total commercial
television advertising pool in 2013-14.  
  
SBS already competes for advertising with the commercial free-to-air
broadcasters, and the proposed bill simply does not change this. Audience size
is fundamentally what attracts most advertisers, and SBS has a niche audience
that simply does not compete with the commercial free-to-air sector in this
respect. I have noted honourable members from the opposition saying that it
would be terrible if the SBS were to carry more advertising in prime time,
because it would encourage them to produce programs that were popular. This of
course shows the impossible task that public broadcasters are set. On one
hand, if they produce program after program of remote interest to the
public—say, Sophocles in the original Greek—they will be accused of being
elitist and a waste of taxpayers' money. On the other hand, if they produce
programs that people actually want to watch, the commercial broadcasters will
say, 'Stop, stop; you're taking our audience.' The reality is that both SBS
and ABC have to tread a line down the middle. It is a question of judgement.
But, on any view, the SBS is an absolute niche broadcaster. For example, over
the past five years the SBS has had no more than four of the top 500 top-
rating free-to-air television programs in the mainland state capital cities
for any given year on either main channels or multichannels. Excluding
football and cycling, this figure drops to between nil and one program.  
  
So, the reality is that this is a sensible, commercial, responsible change to
SBS. It will make it more independent financially. It will give it more
flexibility in terms of advertising. It is simply changing the way in which it
can schedule its advertisements; it is not increasing the number of
advertisements that are broadcast on any day. It will increase SBS's revenues.
At one level I would love to think that the free-to-air television stations
are right in their forecast, but they simply are not. The SBS and the
Department of Communications have gone over these figures very carefully, and
the figure that we are assuming—$28½ million—is a prudent and conservative one
and we think achievable. The figures of $37 million a year that the commercial
television stations have proposed is, as I said, so extreme as to be fanciful.  
  
In its submission to the Senate inquiry on this bill, the SBS itself said:  
  
SBS’s ability to earn commercial revenue is critical to its operating model
and sustainability. As a hybrid funded organisation since 1991, SBS has a
highly evolved workplace culture, operating systems and codes and guidelines
in place to manage the complexities of being a public broadcaster with
commercial activities. The organisation is well-positioned to responsibly and
sensitively manage increased flexibility in advertising and sponsorship in
line with audience and stakeholder expectations, whilst maintaining the
integrity of the SBS Charter.  
  
To summarise for honourable members, to put this all in context: SBS has
traditionally received around 75 per cent of its funding from government,
including its base funding, tied funding for the production broadcast of NITV,
and funding for transmission itself. This financial year, 2014-15, government
revenue to SBS was $286 million. In the same year, SBS's total revenue from
all commercial sources is predicted to be $96 million. Advertising and
sponsorship spikes every four years during the FIFA World Cup, and in 2014-15,
a World Cup year, SBS's revenue, advertising, sponsorship and subscription
channels will be $85.2 million, and that includes additional commercial
revenue from sources such as television royalties, merchandising, rental
income and interest.  
  
So, the changes proposed in this bill have only a minor impact on SBS's
overall revenue make-up, with its commercial revenue share projected to
increase from 25 to 29 per cent of its total revenue over the forward
estimates, and its impact on the rest of the commercial television industry is
somewhere between nil and negligible in real terms.  
  
If this bill is not passed, given the reality that budget efficiencies have
already been signed off on and will be implemented from 1 July, there will be
an immediate, significant and negative impact on SBS. That is the reality. We
were left a growing mountain of debt and an enormous deficit because of
Labor's profligacy. We have had to make savings. SBS is making its
contribution. It surely is outrageous for the Labor Party, having created the
debt problem because of their reckless spending, to then stand in the way of
the government responsibly addressing it. On that note, I commend the bill to
the House.