## Check Against Delivery ##  
  
It is an honour to be in presence of so many distinguished journalists and
foreign correspondents.  
  
And without singling out any other of the many distinguished guests may I
acknowledge Andrew Greste whose brother Peter is imprisoned in Egypt after a
trial that was no more than a shocking mockery of justice.  
  
  
  
Peter Greste is a great Australian journalist who was simply doing his job,
but had the bad luck to be working for the Al Jazeera a news organisation
whose owners are regarded as political opponents by the new Egyptian regime.
Our Government has condemned this decision to imprison Peter, not least
because it is part of a broader attempt to silence a free press.  
  
Our Foreign Minister Julie Bishop has met with her Egyptian counterpart,
Foreign Minister Sameh Shoukry as recently as last month to argue for Peter’s
release. An appeal has been lodged and our officials will continue to provide
every assistance to Peter’s family.  
  
We are often reminded that our freedoms, our way of life are secured because
our defence forces are prepared to put their lives on the line. We should not
forget that the price of the news we read every day, of the transparency,
accountability indeed democracy that only a free press can ensure is all too
often paid in lives and liberty put at risk by journalists like Peter Greste.  
  
In my youth I was fascinated by journalism, by newspapers, radio and
television. Not just because, like so many young males, I was easily bored and
naturally attracted to anything that meant I did not need to concentrate on
one topic for too long.  
  
The romance of news, the adventure, the power and influence were all
intoxicating. I remember returning home from a hiking adventure in Tasmania in
1972 and spending a night in Melbourne - my first.  
  
I remember going with my friends to Young & Jacksons to admire Chloe and drink
beer in pints and then late in the evening we went down to The Age building,
still owned by an independent David Syme & Co and edited by Graham Perkin, and
we lay on the footpath to feel the thunder of the presses as they shook the
street and in a few hours the whole city as the news of the day roared out on
a fleet of trucks.  
  
So I tried my hand at journalism, first at The Nation Review then with Radio
2SM and the Nine Network all the while studying law at the University. My
first beat, as it were, was the State Parliament and while I was too young to
evolve into the classic lobby correspondent - chronicler and conspirator in
equal measures - I was thrilled to get to know and occasionally cross swords
with the political greats of that time including of course my future friend
and business partner Neville Wran.  
  
My great hero was Harold Evans the editor of the London Sunday Times and of
course his great hero, of whom he often spoke, was Nick Tomalin the foreign
correspondent killed by a Syrian missile while covering the Yom Kippur war in
1973.  
  
I first met Evans at the Cambridge Union in 1975. He was one of the guest
speakers and I spoke later from the floor in the debate. A little after my
speech I was handed a note on Sunday Times letterhead. “Come and see me in the
Grays Inn Road if you want to be a journalist” and it was signed by Harold
Evans. A summons from God.  
  
When I met Evans, the next morning, he urged me to drop my legal studies and
concentrate on journalism. He was very persuasive and he summed it up like
this. “If you become a lawyer you will make much more money than you will as a
journalist. But you will be bored out of your wits. You might become a judge -
more boring still. Or, “and at this point his voice dropped ominously “worse
still you could become a politician.”  
  
He didn’t need to elaborate on that dread prospect.  
  
My own efforts as a foreign correspondent were not distinguished. But I did
have a few adventure. In 1974 my trusty Olivetti portable financed my travels
through the USA including a visit to Montgomery Alabama.  
  
I was shocked to see that the flag of the United States was barely present -
flown only from federal buildings like Post Offices. Everywhere else they flew
the Confederate flag and the state flag of Alabama. It was like a different
country.  
  
The Governor was George Wallace and I managed to crash a press conference he
was holding and then secure an interview with him, we canvassed his future
plans, a possible joint ticket with Ronald Reagan and the prospects of young
Jimmy Carter. . In his wheelchair, he still radiated a menacing strength as he
told me that everything I had read about the South was wrong and everything
was different in Alabama.  
  
So when he proposed to appoint me a Lieutenant Colonel in the Alabama State
Militia, I felt it wise not to decline.  
  
I did feel a long way from home.  
  
On another occasion working on a story for Channel Nine in New York I met
Rupert Murdoch for the first time. He had just bought the New York Magazine
and Village Voice and was declining all interviews. I had a good story in the
can - I had even bumped into Robert Hughes in the street and obtained a
typically colourful interview. But no Rupert. So I rang every extension I
could think off at the New York Post until late in the evening a familiarly
Australian voice answered. I quickly explained to Mr Murdoch my problem -
without him I had no story, with him I had a scoop. Perhaps remembering what
it was to be young and a reporter, the great man relented and we piled into a
cab and flew down to the Post’s office on the east river and I interviewed
Rupert on the waterfront across the road from his office.  
  
Later when I was at university at Oxford I continued to work as a journalist
stringing for Packer’s ACP including The Bulletin and the Women's Weekly.
Harold Evans forgave me for going back to Law School and gave me a job on The
Sunday Times.  
  
In those days the Australian media companies had a substantial presence in
London. The Packers’ ACP not only had an office on Ludgate Circus at the end
of Fleet Street but their chief correspondent had a fine company house in the
West End and a driver. And the Fairfax establishment was even grander as I
recall. Those were the days.  
  
Next door on Fleet Street was the art deco magnificence of the Daily Express
building, immortalised in Private Eye as "the black Lubyanka" and the columns
of the Daily Telegraph head quarters built to convey a message of money and
power, and still doing so, but now alas as the home of Goldman Sachs. The
world of which I reminisce is not so long ago in years from us today but a
galaxy, or should I say an iPhone, away in so many other ways.  
  
In those days an Australian abroad would find nothing about Australia in the
local press apart from the cricket scores and then only if you were in a
cricketing country. Australians at home learned about the rest of the world
exclusively through Australian media.  
  
Today the world is utterly changed. The Internet and the smart phone mean that
most people in the developed world and soon most people in the whole world
will be able to connect with each other 24/7. Australians can read The Wall
Street Journal or the New York Times as easily as they can read their local
papers. Social media offers an avalanche of news: it seems that the modern
insurgent has a gun in one hand and a smartphone in the other tweeting and
facebooking his opponents’ and, often as we have seen most apallingly this
week, his own atrocities.  
  
It is a far cry from the world of Evelyn Waugh's Scoop when William Boot was
sent off to Ishmaelia by Lord Copper of The Beast to cover what was hoped to
be a war in Ishmaelia.  
  
“What the British public wants first, last and all the time is News,” said
Lord Copper “Remember that the Patriots are in the right and are going to win.
The Beast stands by them four square. But they must win quickly. The British
public has no interest in a war which drags on indecisively. A few sharp
victories, some conspicuous acts of personal bravery on the Patriot side and a
colourful entry into the capital. That is the Beast policy for the war.....We
shall expect the first victory about the middle of July.”  
  
The Foreign Correspondent Business Model  
  
A recent feature on Indonesia’s President-elect, Joko Widodo or Jokowi, by
Fairfax correspondent Michael Bachelard [1], noted his favourite method for
cutting down on corruption and exposing what’s really going on in the
bureaucracy was by conducting what is known in Bahasa as ‘blukusan’ -- the
unannounced visit.  
  
At its most fundamental, that is also the job of the foreign correspondent: To
be immersed in a foreign, to speak to the elites certainly but well beyond
them, to test the official narrative and statistics against the lived
experience and to listen to those who would otherwise not be heard. The days
of simply rewriting the local news are over - all of that is available
instantly to your readers and editors back home.  
  
But getting access is especially hard for a foreign correspondent. Everywhere
in the world, politics is local and so is the media focus of the politicians.  
  
It has always been expensive to maintain a foreign bureau and that is even
without William Boot’s supply of cleft sticks.  
  
The Harvard Shorenstein Center calculated in 2007 that it costs up to AUD
$318,000 a year to maintain a very basic office overseas, and can cost up to
AUD$1.6 million a year in a city like Baghdad [2], which has extra security
requirements. One Australian correspondent said that a bureau in Indonesia
costs over AUD $300,000 a year to maintain, once you take into account the
cost of accommodation, children’s’ school fees, paying stringers and local
assistants, rent and of course salaries.  
  
Only the ABC now has a substantial international presence with twenty
Australian and 35 locally engaged staff overseas; a good example of what a
public broadcaster should do in my view. It is, of course, much cheaper to fly
in teams to cover specific stories on an on-needs basis. A study by the Media
Standards Trust in the U.K. found this has become much more attractive for
news organisations to cover locations when there is a specific event or crisis
- such as, say, Ukraine. But this comes at the expense of a deep knowledge of
the country and the contacts needed to develop stories in depth [3].  
  
In an online world, the Fairfax correspondent in Washington or Tokyo is not
just competing against a competitor from News Limited or a wire service; they
are competing against every conceivable source of news whether it is the NY
Times, the FT, the Wall Street Journal or the English language online edition
of the Asahi Shimbun.  
  
The New York Times averages 50 million unique visitors to its website each
month, of which, 17 million, or 34 per cent, are outside of the U.S. [4] The
Guardian has 40 million unique users visit its website each month and a
staggering two-thirds of them outside of the U.K. [5]  
  
In June, the Guardian had almost 1.8 million unique viewers come to its site
in Australia, more than visited the Daily Telegraph’s site [6]. The BBC had
more than 1.6 million unique viewers in Australia - more than the Courier
Mail. The Huffington Post was barely edged out by The Australian with 1.3
million unique viewers and the New York Times had 731,000 unique viewers.  
  
Media companies on digital platforms tend to chase two things to get clicks:
Cover immediate, breaking news on the one hand; and go for opinion and
commentary, the more intemperate the better, on the other, to reap social
media shares, likes and retweets. As I have said before, it often feels like
the ‘news cycle’ has been replaced by the ‘outrage cycle’.  
  
But there is a genre of news story that lies in the middle on these two
extremes -- they are those stories which take a few days to put together,
involve the skilful working of contacts and sources, and require a deep and
nuanced knowledge of the subject matter. Reuters Editor-in-Chief David
Schlesinger describes the new media world as enshrining the ‘dumbbell model’
[7] of journalism -- all the weight has now shifted to the two ends of
journalism, leaving not much in the middle.  
  
As one very senior journalist in Canberra’s press gallery told me: ‘There has
been a huge amount of complacency, a growing lack of media interest in policy,
[and] a function of that is a most conspicuous lack of interest in what other
countries are doing in a policy sense, and this is reinforced by the problems
of the business models of newspapers’.  
  
But interestingly, while there may be more of a focus on less weighty issues,
consumers nominate foreign affairs as the most important reason for following
the news. Although numbers in Australia are hard to come by, the U.K.
regulator Ofcom does an annual survey on news consumption [8] which found
‘world-wide current affairs’ was:  
  
● The topic mostly likely to be of interest to respondents (37 per cent), well
ahead of celebrities (11 per cent) and ahead of U.K. politics, local current
affairs, crime, sport and finance. ● The type of news that most people thought
was important to know (49 per cent).  
  
As a result of all these factors, the number of foreign correspondents working
today is in decline.  
  
The Pew Research Centre’s 2014 State of the News Media found that the number
of foreign correspondents working for U.S. newspapers have fallen from 307 in
2003 to 234 in 2011, a drop of 24 per cent [9].  
  
The situation is even worse when it comes to broadcast television in the U.S.
The amount of time devoted to overseas reporting during evening newscasts in
2013 was less than half of what it was in the late 1980s [10]. During the
1980s, the big U.S networks - ABC, NBC and CBS - each maintained about 15
foreign bureaux but by 2007 they had six or fewer, with bureaux being shut
down in Moscow, Paris, Tokyo, Beijing, Cairo and Johannesburg [11].  
  
Definitive numbers in Australia are much harder to quantify.  
  
In the 1960s the Herald and Weekly Times maintained five journalists in
London, three in New York, full-time correspondents in Paris, Rome, Singapore
and Rabaul, plus shared correspondents in Johannesburg, Tokyo, Toronto and New
Delhi. Fairfax maintained large bureaux in London and New York[12].  
  
But such an extensive foreign presence would be unheard of for a newspaper
group today. In recent years, The Australian has closed bureaux in Washington,
New York, Los Angeles, London, Bangkok and New Zealand but still has
correspondents in Jakarta, Beijing, Tokyo, Southeast Asia, Jerusalem and of
course a very extensive network of correspondents to draw upon from the wider
News Corp stable.  
  
Fairfax has correspondents in Washington, London, Beijing, Delhi, the Middle
East and has reinstated Lindsay Murdoch in Southeast Asia, based in Bangkok.
Over the years it has pulled out from Wellington, Tokyo and New York.  
  
The Australian Financial Review no longer has anyone in Tokyo, our second
largest trading partner. The ABC is the standout in this area. It has bureaux
in Washington, London, New Zealand, Jakarta, Beijing, Bangkok, Jerusalem, New
Delhi, Tokyo and stringers in many other locations.  
  
Some journalists and editors I have spoken to have mused whether foreign news
is less important in the local media than it used to be. Not because
Australians had lost interest in the rest of the world - that has increased -
but because there are so many other sources of foreign news available thanks
to the Internet.  
  
One senior journalist I spoke to said that it was routine for the Sydney
Morning Herald to have at least one foreign story on the front page every day.
Now it is possible to go many weeks he said without a single foreign story on
the front page.  
  
Impact on our Understanding of Common Policy Challenges  
  
The vast volume of online news keeps us up to speed about what is happening
anywhere and everywhere, but it does have limitations.  
  
There are places where the local media are not well informed and/or are not
available online in English. Knowing what is going on in New York is easy. But
what about Cairo or Aleppo? Or closer to home, Hanoi, Taipei or Jakarta?  
  
It is noteworthy that the Australian no longer has a correspondent in London
or New York, in part no doubt because it can rely on other News Corporation
publications in those centres, but it does keep a correspondent in Jakarta.  
  
And then there is context. What does news in a far flung place mean for
Australians? Of course some of this context can be injected by seasoned and
knowledgeable writers at home. The New York Times’ Tom Friedman was one of the
first to do this and he has local counterparts like Greg Sheridan and Peter
Hartcher, who are based in Australia but read widely, have a lengthy list of
foreign contacts and travel enough to keep those relationships and connections
fresh.  
  
But there is one aspect of reporting on the rest of the world and placing
information in an Australian context that I believe is underdone.  
  
Let me start with a little background. When I was first elected to Parliament,
one facet of the policy debate that I found quite striking was the lack of
interest most policy makers in Canberra had in other countries’ choices and
outcomes. The same was largely true of the reporting of public policy in the
press.  
  
Compare this to the business world, which has long necessarily been
international – not just because of cross-border integration and the fact that
so many businesses are global, but because we all appreciate that what works
or sells in one market is highly likely to work in another.  
  
These commonalities are more nuanced in public policy – widely varying
cultures, histories and political and economic institutions are more
influential. Nevertheless, the truth is that most policy challenges particular
jurisdictions confront are not unique or unprecedented, whatever local
politicians may say – other policymakers have grappled with them, or with very
similar issues, and over time have tried different approaches yielding
different results.  
  
The Australian media rarely reports how different countries have approached
what are usually shared and very familiar issues that are topical in our own
country, even if the issue is dominating the news.  
  
And the little such reporting there was in the past has almost disappeared in
the digital age. Think about the example of contemporary New Zealand. In the
1980s and 1990s there was at least a modest but useful flow of information
about the radical economic reforms that transformed new Zealand from the most
regulated, rigid capitalist economy in the world to the most open and free –
and the political convulsions that followed. Earnest and sprightly young
economics writers such as Michael Stutchbury, Alan Mitchell and Ross Gittins
would periodically be despatched across the ditch by their editors to report
back from the front line.  
  
Over the past decade, New Zealand has faced many of the same policy challenges
and far stiffer economic headwinds than Australia, and started from a much
weaker position. Yet the Kiwis have managed to deliver a far superior record
of economic performance and reform since the GFC than Australia, particularly
under John Key.  
  
Since 2009 New Zealand has managed to execute significant tax reform –
increasing their GST to 15 per cent to shift their revenue mix toward indirect
taxes, and broadening the bases and lowering the rates of direct taxes on
personal and company income.  
  
The New Zealand Budget has shifted from a deficit of 9.2 per cent of GDP four
years ago – twice as much red ink as Wayne Swan ever managed – to surplus this
year [13]. Although the worst deficit year was distorted by the Canterbury
earthquakes, [14] New Zealand’s fiscal consolidation since the GFC  
  
(most of it coming from curtailing spending) is one of the most exemplary in
the developed world. [15] Economic growth is forecast to exceed growth in
Australia next year.  
  
Economic policy success in New Zealand has received only the most cursory
coverage in Australia. An analysis by the Parliamentary Library found that
from 2009, only 15 articles in major Australian newspapers explored tax reform
in New Zealand - and almost half were opinion pieces written by think tanks or
lobby groups.  
  
Likewise, consider media coverage of the car industry over the past few years
in Australia. One could gain the impression that Australia’s experience has
been unique – that we are the only nation in the OECD where automobile
manufacturing has suffered steep decline.  
  
Perhaps this is due to the paucity of Australian correspondents in the US,
Japan, Germany and France – economies which have been far more emphatically
shaped by the ebb and flow of global vehicle production, as some nations gain
and others lose.  
  
The car industry is global and intensely competitive, and so international
trends are the trends that matter. Large manufacturers are consolidating
factories and manufacturing locations: General Motors will cut its total
number of production facilities by more than half by 2018, as it opens new
plants that achieve increased economies of scale by churning out more than
400,000 vehicles a year. That is twice the output of our entire industry.  
  
So even as we acknowledge the impact the closure of car makers in Australia
will have on affected employees and communities, we must also remind ourselves
that our industry accounts for barely a quarter of 1 per cent of global auto
production. [16]  
  
And even setting scale and distance aside, we should bear in mind that the
viability of our industry has been significantly shaped by the cost in our
economy – relative to other economies – of regulations such as safety and
environmental standards imposed on the industry, and additional expense
imposed by our industrial relations regime.  
  
When the Productivity Commission looked at the local industry’s relative
position, the very first line of its report noted: “Global forces are driving
(and are likely to continue to drive) dramatic changes in both the demand for
motor vehicles and the size, scale and location of production.” [17]  
  
Despite all of these relevant forces, debate in Australia mostly centred upon
the most visible, simplistic of domestic influences – the level of subsidy
Australians are willing to provide to the industry. Coverage of the closures
of Holden and ford was shorn of context and a deeper understanding of the
policy issues raised.  
  
Finally my favourite example – broadband policy.  
  
The previous Government made a commitment in 2007 to spend billions of
taxpayers’ dollars – 4.7 billion of them to be precise – to upgrade broadband
infrastructure. This is not exceptional; many (although far from all) advanced
and emerging economies are doing likewise.  
  
But from 2009 onwards, a series of extraordinary policy choices resulted in
Australia tackling a familiar and shared problem – how to achieve widespread
access to very fast broadband – with a policy of exotic uniqueness.  
  
No other country created a Government-owned start-up to deliver the upgrades;
no other country is spending as much per premise for the upgrades and most
other countries are encouraging infrastructure-based competition rather than
paying competitors with sunk costs to close down their fully functional
networks.  
  
Broadband was we were told a vital issue at the last election. The Coalition
had a comprehensive policy which had been derived in large part from my
research into what other countries were doing. In particular I noted that
considerable savings were made by not taking fibre into every premises as the
Labor government had planned. Our fibre to the node approach was ridiculed and
attacked as unworkable, out of date, a technological absurdity.  
  
So if this was the big issue surely the international experience was relevant.
Surely any level of journalistic curiosity would have caused an editor to send
a reporter to interview BT or ATT&amp;T; or Deutsche Telekom about their
experience.  
  
And so I issued a challenge to journalists and our major media organisations -
who do have the requisite reporters and networks overseas to do the story
justice - to do a comparison of what other countries are doing and what
technologies are being deployed.  
  
After three years of frustration and complaints, the only two people to
actually do an international comparison were not from the mainstream press at
all: They were Phil Dobbie and Josh Taylor, who write for industry
publications CommsDay and ZDNet.  
  
The ABC was no exception. They devoted hundreds of hours to talking about
broadband but with the biggest international news gathering network in the
nation, they resolutely failed to do anything to give Australians the
comparative information they deserved.  
  
We should, intellectually, get out more.  
  
Conclusion  
  
There is an argument that in a world where everyone has access to social media
and google, that foreign correspondents are no longer really needed -- that it
is a relic that no longer reflects the realities of how news is gathered or
what the economics of media organisations will allow.[18]  
  
This is an issue that many, many journalists - particularly senior journalists
- have raised with me and there is a tendency particularly among younger
journalists to rely on Google rather than forging their own contacts and
wearing out their shoe leather.  
  
Although the author gives a nuanced argument about economic pressures of
newsrooms in maintaining foreign bureaux, he presents an optimistic view of
these being replaced by social media and local reporters, stating: “The social
media phenomenon has turned the 140 characters of Twitter into an effective
news source. We are increasingly guided by our friends and peers through
recommendations and links. Everyone now has access to the public space, giving
rise to citizen journalism and more” (p.27).  
  
Indeed the world has changed and it would be foolish to think that digital
platforms are useless when it comes to news-gathering. But there is something
admirable in the tradecraft developed by generations of journalists who didn’t
source-check their stories via the Internet.  
  
Most people now agree that the spring of citizen journalism has turned out to
be like many of the recent ‘springs’ that have occurred in the Middle East:
Nuanced, multi-layered and not lending itself to simplistic narratives.  
  
Indeed a recent study found that not everything is always as it seems with the
social media images coming out of Tunisia and Egypt. Supposed grassroots
social media posts are increasing in their professionalism and media
organisations struggling to verify the credibility of their posts [19].  
  
The term that has arisen to describe the reliance on social media for
reporting - “accidental journalism” - has never seemed so apt. In tough
economic conditions when consumers have access to a deluge of information,
credibility for media organisations is more important than ever, not less. I
am reminded of the sardonic quip of the veteran CBS correspondent Morley
Safer, when he said: “I would trust citizen journalism as much as I would
trust citizen surgery”[20].  
  
And it is worth noting that while Australian news organisations are pulling
back from maintaining foreign bureaux, most of the journalists that I have
spoken to are genuinely surprised at how many still remain, even though there
have been deeper cuts elsewhere in the business.  
  
It was the world-weary English journalist Thomas Fowler in The Quiet American
who summed up why you can’t always rely on a writer popping in and out of a
foreign country to tell their stories: “They say you come to Vietnam and you
understand a lot in a few minutes, but the rest has got to be lived.”  
  
On returning from China where he worked for six years with Fairfax, John
Garnaut wrote a beautiful piece about his time there, echoing these same
sentiments and reminding us that a foreign correspondent lives and breathes
each story more than just about any other journalist on any other beat:  
  
“Each night,” John wrote, “my head reeled with the implications of information
absorbed but not fully digested. Where was China going? Was I doing justice to
the story and getting the balance right? Grey hairs appeared, the skin under
my eyes grew darker and I found myself jolted wide awake, bathed in sweat, in
the pre-dawn hours each morning. With every road trip and each deep interview,
I discovered afresh how little I'd known before.”  
  
We all, as citizens, depend on John and his colleagues getting those stories
right and that is why it is such an honour to be here tonight.  
  
ENDS  
  
  
  
[1] Bachelard, M., (2014), “Joko Widodo: A Man With a Mission”, in The Sydney
Morning Herald, available online here: http://www.smh.com.au/lifestyle/joko-
widodo-man-with-a-mission-20140609-... [2] Carroll, J., (2007), “Foreign News
Coverage: The U.S. Media’s Most Undervalued Asset”, p.8, available online
here: http://shorensteincenter.org/wp-
content/uploads/2012/03/2007_01_carroll.pdf [3] Estimates for a fly-in team to
cover specific stories is as little as £6000 (AUD$10,800) per story - see:
Moore,  
  
M., (2010), “Shrinking world: the decline of international reporting in the
British Press” available online here:  
  
http://mediastandardstrust.org/wp-content/uploads/downloads/2010/10/Shri...
international-reporting.pdf  
  
[4] NY Times, (2014), “Innovation Report”, p.19 available online here:  
  
http://www.scribd.com/doc/224608514/The-Full-New-York-Times-Innovation-R...
[5] Doctor, K., (2014), “The Newsonomics of the Guardian’s New ‘Known’
Strategy”, available online here:  
  
http://www.niemanlab.org/2014/02/the-newsonomics-of-the-guardians-new-kn...
[6] Nielsen Online Ratings, (2014), “Unique Audience for News Sites - June
2014”.  
  
[7] Quoted in Sambrook, R., (2010), “Are Foreign Correspondents Redundant? The
Changing Face of International News”, published by the Reuters Institute for
the Study of Journalism, p.8, available online here;
http://www.ox.ac.uk/media/news_stories/2010/100912_1.html [8] Ofcom, (2014),
“News Consumption in the U.K.”, available online here:
http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/market-data-research/other/tv-research/... .
Figures cited are available in the data tables, pp.28-32  
  
[9] Pew Research Center, (2014), “The State of the News Media”, p.5, available
online here: http://www.journalism.org/files/2014/03/Overview.pdf [10] Ibid  
  
[11] Constable, P., (2007), “Demise of the Foreign Correspondent’, in the
Washington Post, February 18, available here:
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-
dyn/content/article/2007/02/16/AR2007021601713.html  
  
[12] D Warner, (1965), “Foreign news”, in L Revill and C Roderick [eds] The
Journalist’s craft: a guide to modern practice, p. 207.  
  
[13] NZ Treasury, (2014), “Budget Economic and Fiscal Update”, available
online here http://www.treasury.govt.nz/budget/forecasts/befu2014/befu14.pdf.  
  
[13] NZ Treasury, (2014), “Budget Economic and Fiscal Update”, available
online here http://www.treasury.govt.nz/budget/forecasts/befu2014/befu14.pdf .  
  
[14] NZ Treasury estimated that half of the 2010-11 deficit could be accounted
for in one-off effects due to the Canterbury earthquakes:
http://www.treasury.govt.nz/budget/2013/fsr/04.htm [15] MF, (2013), “Fiscal
Monitor”, p.5, available online here:  
  
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fm/2013/02/pdf/fm1302.pdf [16] PC, (2013),
“Automotive Manufacturing in Australia: Preliminary Findings”, p.27: available
online here:  
  
http://www.pc.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0005/131396/automotive-preli...
[17] Ibid  
  
[18] For instance: Sambrook, R., (2010), “Are Foreign Correspondents
Redundant”, available online here:  
  
https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/sites/default/files/Are%20For...
%20The%20changing%20face%20of%20international%20news.pdf.  
  
[19] Bossio, D., and Bebawi, S., (2012), “Reaping and Sowing the news from an
Arab Spring: The Politicised interaction between traditional and alternative
journalistic practitioners”, Global Media Journal, Vol 6, No 2., available
online here:
http://researchbank.swinburne.edu.au/vital/access/manager/Repository/swi... 20
Quoted in The Economist, (2013), “Foreign Correspondents”, available online
at: http://www.economist.com/news/international/21578662-amateur-
journalists... foreign-correspondents  
  
[20] Quoted in The Economist, (2013), “Foreign Correspondents”, available
online at: http://www.economist.com/news/international/21578662-amateur-
journalists... foreign-correspondents