Good afternoon. It is a pleasure to be here today to launch the Jobs In
Australia’s App Economy paper. I’d like to welcome Will Marshall, President of
the US Progressive Policy Institute and Michael Mandel. My thanks also to
Global Access Partners for organising this event.  
  
In the 1880s natural ice harvesting was big business - at its peak the US ice
market was worth about $660 million in today’s dollars. It was a clever and
labour intensive business. Workers would measure the thickness of lake ice
with a hand turned drill and, if thick enough, a horse drawn plough-like
device would crisscross the lake into a chess board of squares, which was then
cut into cubes.  
  
Demand was strong and firms were innovative. In Norway, a network of
artificial lakes provided a ready supply, and increasingly sophisticated
transport networks allowed ice to be shipped around the world. Businesses knew
they needed to innovate to stay competitive. American Fredric Tudor became the
‘Ice King’, pioneering techniques such as packing the ice with sawdust instead
of straw to better insulate ice being transported across the tropics.  
  
But despite the ingenuity, the fall of the ice trade was abrupt. In 1882, the
first commercially viable refrigerated ship, the Dunedin, sailed from Auckland
to London and in 1911 General Electric released its first household fridge. By
1910 the US was only exporting 15,000 tons of ice, a far cry from the boom
days in the 1880s where more than four million tons was stored on the Hudson
River.  
  
Shortly after, the ice harvesting industry came to an abrupt end. I’m sure
some of you are thinking, “what’s this go to do with apps?” It’s all about
disruption and innovation. For businesses to survive today, they need to be
more than just technically efficient. They also need to experiment outside
their traditional markets. They need to be aware that with the internet almost
all sectors, all industries, are trade exposed, driving global competition.
The app economy epitomises that demand. Check your smartphone - how many
alerts do you receive to update you about a new feature, a new product? The
app economy is adaptive and innovative, and all businesses have a lot of learn
from its agility.  
  
The Australian App Economy  
  
For the first time in history, a business has access to every consumer with a
mobile phone - that’s about 1.5 billion people. If your business operates an
app, consumers across the globe can access your services. But more than that,
consumers can also access the services of your competitors.  
  
The days of the local competition being just down the road are long gone.
Australia’s economy is strong and growing, but within that is the threat and
opportunity of digital disruption. Two-thirds of Australian businesses face
imminent disruption. According to the ABS, 460,800 workers were employed in
the 18 primary ICT occupations in August 2012,[1] with ICT workers accounting
for 4.1 per cent of our total workforce. In the next five years employment in
the ICT sector is projected to grow by 33,200 workers, or 7.1 per cent.[2] The
importance of the ICT sector to Australia’s economy is clear.  
  
Research by the Centre for Innovative Industries Economic Research estimates
that ICT contributed 6.9% to GDP. The same research found that the annual
contribution of the digital economy to the broader Australian economy was $100
billion in 2011.[3] Dr Mandel’s paper makes a useful contribution -
identifying apps as a major and growing part of the ICT sector and of the
economy more generally. It tells a very positive story - that many Australians
understand the importance of apps for their business, whether they are small
businesses connecting directly with consumers or providing services to
multinationals.  
  
App development is becoming one of Australia’s strengths and one where we can
compete with the best in the world. Dr Mandel’s report finds that there are
139,000 jobs in the Australian app economy. In Sydney, 10.7% of ICT jobs
relate directly to app development, more than in New York, Chicago or London -
albeit a long way from Silicon Valley’s 17.6%.  
  
Demand for apps continues to grow, suggesting there’s a limited role for
government here and the best thing we can do is to get out of the way to let
private sector innovation continue to flourish.  
  
Cloud Computing and Open Data  
  
I would like to finish by touching on a few of the important things government
is doing to improve the way it uses ICT and to encourage innovation. The first
is cloud computing. The Government will soon release a revised cloud computing
policy - to significantly increase the take up of cloud services by federal
government agencies, consistent with our policy for e-Government and the
Digital Economy. And as important as vision statements are, of most importance
are the actions we’re taking to remove barriers that currently restrict, and
in many cases actually prevent, agencies from procuring cloud services.  
  
We cannot shy away from the fact that we need to improve the way ICT has
traditionally been delivered by government. Consider the fact that the federal
government alone spends about $6 billion a year on ICT and yet has spent less
than $5 million on cloud services since July 2010. Changes, which I look
forward to announcing in the coming weeks, will present a range of
opportunities for cloud service providers as government agencies increasingly
move to deliver ICT as a service. The second is open data - an area where we
are making good progress. Open data is a key government lever which, if used
correctly, can help to spur innovation.  
  
The Government recognises the immense enabling role that open dta can play -
particularly when it comes to app creation. The Coalition has a clear agenda
to release government data in anonymised and machine readable form as standard
practice. As a result, 86% of the data available through data.gov.au has been
added since the Abbott Government came to power, with a number of new valuable
datasets to be added over the coming months.  
  
Let me return to where I started. Fredric ‘the Ice King’ Tudor ended up in a
debtor’s prison twice before he was able to crack the ice market. Failure is
the hallmark of many successful innovators. As this paper shows, Australia is
well placed to rise to the challenge of digital disruption and embrace the app
economy. Cloud computing, open data and apps are completely changing the way
business, and increasingly government, engage with their customers.  
  
Governments and businesses that fail to embrace these technologies risk being
left behind by new ideas and new innovations, or even melting away like those
early ice traders. I thank the authors for this report. [ends]  
  
[1] Australian Workforce and Productivity Agency, ICT Workforce Study, July
2013, p30 http://www.awpa.gov.au/publications/Documents/ICT-STUDY-
FINAL-28-JUNE-2013.pdf  
  
[2] Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations, Meeting
Australia’s future ICT skills needs July 2013.  
  
[3] Australian Computer Society, Australian ICT Statistical Compendium 2013
http://www.acs.org.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/28570/Australian-ICT-
Statistical-Compendium-2013.pdf  
  
[4] http://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prAU24222413  
  
[5] http://www.pm.gov.au/media/2013-12-18/securing-australias-manufacturing-
future