Mr TURNBULL (Wentworth—Minister for Communications) (10:28): Neville Wran was
my best friend. I certainly never had a better friend than Neville. I was in
business with him for over a decade and we spent pretty much every working day
together for well over a decade. He always used to say that he knew me before
I knew him because he was a university friend of my mother's. He would
regularly assert that he knew me when I was still en ventre ma mere, a legal
term he was very fond of. I got to know him when we were two adults, although
I was only barely an adult, when I was a young journalist in the press gallery
in New South Wales starting in 1975 when Neville was the opposition leader. He
was clearly the coming man. He had an urbanity, a wit and eloquence that had
no parallel on either side of the house.  
  
  
  
The Labor Party in those days was very different to what it is today. It is a
much more tertiary educated, sophisticated group of people, albeit from a
pretty narrow caste, I suppose—the apparatchik class.  
  
In those days the trade union officials in the parliament were horny-handed
sons of toil—people who had worked with their hands, like Jack Ferguson, who
was Neville's great friend. Neville was this extraordinarily urbane,
beautifully dressed, extremely handsome man. Neville was a great heartthrob at
university, my mother always told me, and he was a very handsome guy—an actor
and I suppose he could have been a movie star if he had turned his mind to it.
So, he was quite remarkable.  
  
Needless to say, it did not take long, despite the family connection, before
we were coming to blows with each other. As the member for Sydney intimated,
Neville had a take no prisoners approach to opponents. He was scathing—though
always funny—in his attacks on his political opponents or opponents in the
press. The Abbott government is accused of being critical of the ABC, but
nobody could have been more scathing of the ABC than Neville Wran. I got to
know him and we got on well, although in a fairly confrontational way
sometimes. Towards the end of his premiership I was chatting to him and I
said, 'What are you going to do—are you going to get out of politics?' He was
quite bored with state politics by that stage. In fact, Neville told me 18
months after he became Premier that he was bored. The tragedy is that he never
came to Canberra. It was one of those dreadful accidents of history and
timing. He had had an operation on his throat—he had lost his voice and that
would have made it difficult. Then Hawke came onto the scene, and the
opportunity was no longer there.  
  
I asked him what he was going to do and he mentioned a very good friend of
his, Peter Valkenburg. He said he thought he might go into business with
Peter. I asked, 'Neville, why would you want to go into business with someone
as old as you?' When I was talking to Neville about this, he was exactly the
same age I am today. I often think to myself that I was 31 years of age and I
thought this bloke was just about knocked up—he was so old. I said to him that
we should do something together. Bruce McWilliam and I had just set up our own
law firm. I was in the middle of the Spycatcher case and we had a good
practice, and I said that maybe there was something we could do together.
Anyway, I told him, 'Don't hang around with people your own age, hang around
with younger people.' That was definitely good advice.  
  
Anyway, time went on and we worked together and then we set up an investment
banking business called Whitlam-Turnbull, with me, Nick Whitlam and Neville.
Neville used to say it was one of those rare occasions when he was the
smallest ego in the room. Nick left us in 1990 but Neville and I continued
right through to 1997, and in fact some time after that, and it was a terrific
partnership. It was very successful financially, but we had so much fun
together. He was the best of men, such a wonderful friend. He was completely
and utterly loyal. I have never known anybody who you could count on more than
Neville Wran. If I had to pull anybody out to stick with me in a tight corner,
Neville was the most solid. Look at the way he stood by Lionel Murphy when
Murphy was going through all of his travails. At one point Neville observed
that he thought Murphy was innocent. To my great surprise, he was charged with
contempt of court. To this day I do not know how you can be in contempt of
court by saying you think somebody is innocent, because everyone is innocent
until they are proven guilty. In any event, Murphy was convicted in a decision
that I must say I thought at the time was clearly wrong in law. It was after
Neville was Premier, and he was fined $5,000 or something like that. I asked
whether he was going to appeal to the High Court, and he said, 'No, no, son;
the Labor Party loves a martyr.' He knew he would win on appeal.  
  
He suffered dreadfully when he was in government because of accusations of
corruption, which were baseless. I say they were baseless because the Liberal
government that succeeded Labor in 1988 set up ICAC. Again, I must say I urged
Nick Greiner not to do that; I had very strong views about star chambers,
having represented Packer in the Costigan royal commission. And anyway, Nick
set that up and it brought him down. But they certainly did not succeed in
even making a coherent allegation against Wran.  
  
Neville was very hurt by all of those allegations, really deeply hurt—that
wounded him. He went through the royal commission over the Kevin Humphries
rugby league allegations, and it hurt him. I can just say this about Wran: I
knew him better. I would say there would be no man outside of his family that
would have known Neville better than I did and, certainly, no-one who would
have known his affairs better than I did. Neville Wran, when he got out of
politics, had a pension and he had a house, and that was it. So all of those
allegations about Wran being corrupt were simply baseless. But it is a rough
business and I guess one cannot overdo the sympathy for him in that regard
because he was a very tough partisan politician himself; he was playing in a
rough game.  
  
We had some amazing adventures together. At one point we were involved in a
gold project in Siberia. We were financing a gold project in Siberia. Neville
came on one trip to Siberia, and at the same time we had another gold project
in Ghana. He took me aside after all these bizarre people we encountered in
Siberia—large men with guns and all this stuff. I thought it was pretty
frightening. He took me aside and said, 'Son, here is the deal: you do Russia,
I will do Africa.' So I commuted to Siberia and Neville commuted to Ghana!  
  
We had some success in both of those emerging markets. But where we had a lot
of success, frankly, was in China, where we worked together. It was something
Neville and I were both very proud of. We got started and set up the first
Sino-Western mining project, which is still extant, but was sold a long time
ago. It was a big zinc mine in Hebei province. It was back more than 20 years
ago, quite an achievement at that time.  
  
He was, as the member for Sydney said, a leading member of the republican
movement. In fact, the Australian Republican Movement was founded following a
lunch between him and Tom Keneally over a bottle of chardonnay. I just wish
they had not said that, because we were always accused of being chardonnay-
swilling elitists as a consequence. But he was a key member of the ARM. He
recognised that for the republican movement to be successful it could not be
seen to be a Labor Party campaign in and of itself. So he was delighted when I
became—in fact he encouraged me to become—the chairman of the ARM because,
obviously, I had a background in the Liberal Party but at that time was not a
member of any political party.  
  
He was just a source of extraordinary wisdom, always, in all of our years in
the republican campaign. I have to say—and this is a matter of public
record—that the ARM was largely funded by Neville and me for years. We were by
far the largest financial supporters of it, and kept that campaign going for a
very long time. Those people among us who have raised money for political
parties know how hard that is; try raising money for something like that,
where there is absolutely no power—it is just a constitutional reform agenda.  
  
Neville has often been described as an enigma. I am not quite sure what people
mean by that. I would say he was just very circumspect about himself. He did
not open his heart generally or widely, but when you got to know him he had a
generosity and intimacy that was quite remarkable. His close friends
recognised that—and obviously Jill and his children were foremost in that
regard. Many of his close friends are no longer with us, Jim McClelland and
Lionel Murphy being two obvious examples. But for so many others, he was
always the barrister. He always had that legal sheen, that legal shell that he
put around himself.  
  
We had an extraordinary time together. I think he was a role model in
politics. The member for Sydney said that he made an enormous contribution to
the Labor Party, winning in 1976 after Whitlam's catastrophic immolation in
1975. What Wran was able to do was restore Labor's reputation for management.
Whatever people may say about Gough Whitlam's government, its passions and its
reforms and so forth, it was a hopeless administration—it was mismanagement on
an appropriately magnificent Whitlam-esque scale.  
  
Wran was an extremely good manager. He ran a very competent government and he
ran surpluses. When he left office the state Treasury was in surplus. Indeed,
when Labor was finally defeated after his successor Unsworth was defeated in
1988, they had money in the bank. So it was a very responsible approach to
government. He was also totally focused on doing things—and this is a big
distinction between him and a number of the Labor governments that succeeded
him. Neville was not a professional politician. He did not go into politics
because he wanted a job. He was not an apparatchik. He had huge reservations
about the way the Labor Party was being taken over by a sort of professional,
apparatchik political class, as many of the Labor people of his generation
have said elsewhere. He saw his job as being to get in and do things whereas
so many of his successors saw the business of politics as simply staying in
government. Wran had none of that. He was an absolute activist, whether it was
on law reform or on building things, and Darling Harbour has obviously been
mentioned. He had a massive commitment to action in government. I think that
is a good example for all of us, whatever our politics might be.  
  
It is very sad to say farewell to Neville Wran, but I have to say his last few
years were very, very tough. As another old friend of mine once observed, old
age is not for sissies, and Neville did it very, very hard. He hated getting
old. He hated getting old even before he became ill. He showed great courage
in those final years. His fortitude in that time is an example to all of us,
although I do not think any of us would want to spend the last few years of
our lives in the way Neville did. There is something rather sad of course when
great men or great women die at such great ages. We wish everyone a long life.
But, of course, Neville Wran ceased to be Premier in 1986, nearly 30 years
ago. He became Premier in 1976, nearly 40 years ago. So, so much of what he
did, so much of what he stood for and so much of the impact that he had is
only remembered. I was reflecting yesterday in the House when the Prime
Minister and the Leader of the Opposition both spoke very well about him that
neither of them really knew him as a contemporary.  
  
Even though we were not contemporaries—he was the same age as my father—I only
got to know him closely by an accident of having worked with him for so long.  
  
Farewell Neville Wran. He made an extraordinary contribution to this country.
He was a great patriot. I am very sorry that we are not a republic, not least
because Neville always said to me that he was worried we would not become a
republic in his lifetime. But who knows, we may be able to fulfil his ambition
at a later date. At the Constitutional Convention in 1998, Wran was part of
the ARM's delegation—one of the elected delegates. Boy, that was a fractious
arena. That made the Senate look like child's play with all the different
agendas and groups, and people running around. Neville's charm and ability to
pull people together was in full force. We would not have got an outcome out
of the Constitutional Convention without him. There would not have been a
republican movement without him. Sydney would not be the great city it is
without him. He was one of the great men of our times, but he was also one of
the best of men and he is sadly missed.  
  
Like the member for Sydney, speaking on my own behalf and on Lucy's, who was
also a very close friend of Neville's, Neville was family, basically, we pass
on our condolences, as we have already, to his children: Kim, his daughter
from his first marriage to Marcia; Glenn Wran, Marcia's son; and, of course,
Harriet and Hugo, his children with Jill, his widow. All of them have
wonderful memories of Neville—we all do.  
  
In closing, I just say this about Neville Wran. It is hard for those of us who
saw him in his last years not to have our minds seared by the sheer sadness of
his predicament. But we really have to put that aside and we have to remember
Neville, as he would want us to remember him—hair full of boot polish, eyes
flashing, eloquent, savage, witty, magnificent in his formidable, forensic
power. That is the Neville Wran we should always remember. He was such a great
man and I miss him terribly.