Well thank you so much Scott. Thank you Julian and Nick. It is great to be
speaking at the Menzies Research Centre. A great institution and I recall the
time when I was Chairman and we did a lot of great work. Great work which has
produced stronger public policy in many areas.  
  
Now ladies and gentleman we are living in a time of economic change
unprecedented in human history in both its scale and its pace.  
  
Hardworking Australians are seeing this reality on the nightly news – how
trade, globalization, and, above all, technological change is producing both
new opportunities and also uncertainty in their world.  
  
All Australians, not just economists, know we need to innovate and build new
industries and strengthen existing ones because the mining construction boom
has ended and the economy must transition to create new sources of growth and
jobs.  
  
Our resilience our resourcefulness is being tested in an intensely competitive
and volatile global economy.  
  
But if we as Australians make the right calls to ensure a strong economy and
embrace enterprise and innovation to drive jobs and growth, we can secure our
future as a high-wage first world economy with a generous social safety net.  
  
That’s why Australians face a critical choice on July 2.  
  
This election is about two very different versions of what Australia should
look like in the future. Two very different visions.  
  
My Coalition team’s national economic plan sets Australia up for a secure and
successful future in the 21st century. We are the only team at this election
with an economic plan and every element of our Plan is directed at generating
stronger economic growth, and more jobs.  
  
Our opponents take a different and very complacent view: they seem to assume
economic growth is a given, and that no matter how much you tax, how much you
spend, the good times will just keep rolling.  
  
Our Plan will encourage more businesses to grow, to invest and to employ. And
we will live within our means with record spending on education, health and
infrastructure and at the same time bring the Budget back into balance.  
  
The Budget that Scott brought down is our plan. It is all set out. Not a lot
of pictures. A lot of numbers and a lot of analysis.  
  
Labor on the other hand wants to deny tax cuts to all but the smallest
businesses, run larger deficits, incur more debt, increase taxes on business
and investment - in other words discourage investment and employment.  
  
Now do we need more investment; do we need more enterprise and more jobs? Of
course we do.  
  
Australians can see in our policy measures that encourage that - you lower the
tax on investment, you get more investment.  
  
What is Labor doing? It is increasing taxes on investment, reducing the return
on investment. That will result inevitably in less investment and that means
less jobs.  
  
Now Australia has survived the greatest terms of trade shock in its history.
With the wind back, inevitable wind back I might add, of the mining
construction boom. In fact, we are doing much better than surviving. How has
this happened? It is not by chance.  
  
We are recording strong growth in many sectors, information and
telecommunications, tourism, financial services, retail trade and health care.
Agricultural incomes have grown strongly on the back of our export trade
deals.  
  
All of this indicates our plan is working - a stronger and more diverse
economy, with industries old and new contributing to the heavy lifting.  
  
In times like these - here citizens of the lucky country, more than ever we
have to make your own luck.  
  
If we were to falter in our strong and disciplined approach to transitioning
our economy, there is a real risk of us falling off the back of the pack of
the world’s leading economies.  
  
Today I’m going to take you through my Coalition team’s Plan for a Stronger,
New Economy.  
  
I want to explain exactly what we mean when we talk about “Jobs and Growth”.  
  
I’m going to explain how the elements of our plan are designed to make
Australia more innovative, more productive, and more competitive, and how our
plan is working already to deliver strong growth and more jobs.  
  
I want to stress to you why it is critical to our economic security that we
stick to this plan.  
  
If we see our plan through over the next three years, Australians will have
every reason to approach the future with great confidence and optimism.  
  
Half of the world’s middle class will soon reside in Asia. This gives
Australian business massive opportunities to grow new global markets that will
deliver jobs at home.  
  
To seize these opportunities, we have to help ensure our businesses are nimble
and competitive. We have to promote a vibrant culture of enterprise and
innovation - in every industry from agriculture to advanced manufacturing.
Innovation is not just for twenty-something programmers; it is the key for
every firm to be successful in the 21st century.  
  
Our GDP grew 3.1 per cent in the year to March, faster than any of the G7
economies and well above the OECD average.  
  
That doesn’t happen by accident. You need strong economic leadership. You need
a pro-growth pro-business agenda that delivers investment and jobs.  
  
My Government is providing that leadership and driving that plan for jobs and
growth.  
  
In the last calendar year, 300,000 new jobs were created; almost two thirds of
these were women.  
  
The unemployment rate at 5.7 per cent is well below where it had been
anticipated to be when we came into government.  
  
And the Budget is now on an achievable path back to surplus.  
  
Our economy and our Budget are now heading in the right direction.  
  
But to ensure our longer-term economic security, we can and must do more to
stay ahead of the curve.  
  
Let me turn to exports, a key element, a key driver of success for us in the
future.  
  
Critical to our economic plan are our export trade deals, ensuring our
businesses have premium access to the world’s largest and most dynamic
economies, including our major trading partners in Asia - where within a few
years will be found half of the world’s middle class consumers.  
  
This has all happened in a few decades. This is what I mean about the
extraordinary times in which we live. The pace and the scale of change has no
precedent in human history.  
  
Our export trade deals with China, Korea and Japan are giving our farmers a
competitive edge and higher prices, our tourism sector more visitors, our
colleges and universities more students and they are opening the doors for all
our exporters, especially services, into these giant markets.  
  
The Trans-Pacific Partnership free-trade agreement our Government negotiated
with the United States and 10 other leading world economies awaits
ratification by the US Congress and we are negotiating new trade deals with
the rising economic giants, India and Indonesia.  
  
The results are already strong. In the last quarter, we recorded a 4.4 per
cent lift in exports, and 6 per cent for the year. Services exports grew by 14
per cent over the year - the fastest growth since 2000.  
  
Now it is worth remembering that Labor, under pressure from a ferocious ACTU
campaign to block ChAFTA, only agreed a minute before midnight to pass the
legislation ratifying that historic trade deal.  
  
The Greens and Nick Xenophon are also vocal opponents of this element of our
plan to generate jobs and growth.  
  
Only this week, the ACTU was again piling pressure on Labor, if elected, to
reopen elements of these agreements.  
  
It is another pointer to the chaos and economic uncertainty likely to arise if
a Labor-Greens-Independents alliance is revived at this election.  
  
Our export trade deals are creating jobs right across Australia and in every
sector;  
  
Let’s be very clear about this.  
  
Globalisation means we are now in a much larger global market. More
opportunities but also more competition.  
  
If we want to pull the doona over our head, like Labor and the Greens and
pretend it’s not happening, then we will be left behind.  
  
We have to embrace these opportunities, seize them and win.  
  
And we can only do that with a plan.  
  
We have that plan, and we can see that it is working. We can see that
Australians can compete and win on global markets.  
  
Our national economic plan creates these incentives and opportunities to grow
- the risk of an alliance of Labor, the Greens, independents and the unions is
that they will make it harder for enterprising Australians to take their
products and ideas to the world.  
  
Another key driver is directly supporting Australian enterprise.  
  
Small and medium businesses, many of them family owned businesses, are at the
heart of our economy. Their energy and commitment is vital to jobs and growth.  
  
Our Plan for a Strong, New Economy backs small and medium business.  
  
Under our plan from July 1 businesses with a turnover of less than $10 million
will receive a tax cut and access to instant asset write-offs.  
  
Labor has said it will only support tax cuts to businesses which turn over
less than $2 million.  
  
That means if we are not re-elected, 100,000 small and medium businesses with
turnovers between $2 and $10 million and employing 2.2 million Australians
will get no support to invest, to employ, to grow.  
  
The tax cuts we will keep, we will deliver will help every one of those
employers, encouraging more investment in businesses, more jobs, higher
retained earnings, higher real wages.  
  
Until very recently, Mr Shorten was happy to say that tax cuts for business
were good for jobs, growth, productivity and higher wages.  
  
Let me quote to you from his interview from March, 2012:  
  
“Any student of Australian business and economic history since the mid-
eighties knows that part of Australia's success was derived through the
reduction in the company tax rate. We need to be able to make life easier for
Australian business, which employs two in three Australians.”  
  
Well said, you might say. A penetrating glimpse of the obvious, from
presumably, a student of Australian business and economic history. Sadly the
student, Mr Shorten has either lost his memory, or lost his way.  
  
The proven experience of business tax cuts is as he said in 2012, that they
generate growth and jobs.  
  
Basic common sense and economic principles confirm it. Economic modelling
confirms it. Statistical research confirms it. Chris Bowen has confirmed it.
He went so far as to write a book about it.  
  
Peter Costello cut company tax, as did Paul Keating. So persuaded was he that
he cut it twice!  
  
When Peter Costello reduced our company tax to 30 per cent, we were the 9th
lowest in the OECD. Now we are at the uncompetitive bottom of the pack with 27
OECD nations having a lower company tax rate than us.  
  
Since 2008 New Zealand has cut its company tax rate from 33 to 28 percent.  
  
And over the same period the UK has gradually reduced its company tax rate
from 30 to 20 percent, and will further reduce it to 18 percent by 2020.  
  
More investment means more jobs and higher wages. As businesses put more money
into their enterprise, they grow. As they grow they need to have more people.
As they grow they are more profitable, they can then pay their employees more.  
  
Labor and the Greens see a conflict between business and workers. Well let’s
try this quiz? Who would you rather work for - a business that is doing well,
investing and growing? Or one that is struggling, burdened by too much tax?  
  
Struggling to succeed in markets because there isn’t the encouragement to
enter them. Who would you rather work for? A business that is achieving well,
investing more and growing, or one that is struggling? Its obvious isn’t it?
And yet everything Labor and the Greens are doing will discourage business and
discourage investment. And when they do that they discourage employment.  
  
Now Independent Economics’ Chris Murphy, who led the tax modelling work for
Labor’s Henry Tax Review when Bill Shorten was last in government, shows that
the benefit to Australian consumers from our enterprise tax plan is $2.39 of
benefit for every single dollar of tax cut.  
  
Now that is exactly the kind of economic dividend for workers that was once
championed very persuasively and effectively in government by Paul Keating -
but which is now repudiated by the modern Labor party.  
  
These are economy-wide gains - the benefit of jobs and growth - that Bill
Shorten is opposing, just so he can play cheap politics with his toxic attacks
on “the big end of town”.  
  
In the next term of Parliament, the only firms which will get enterprise tax
cuts under our plan, are small-to-medium businesses that collectively employ
more than 4.4 million hard-working Australians.  
  
They are not big banks. Overwhelmingly they are Australian-owned, hard-working
family enterprises.  
  
Now we are backing also young Australians who need a job, young Australians
who have struggled to get into the work force. Scott Morrison set out an
innovative PaTH Program in the budget, which will ensure that 120,000 young
unemployed Australians have the opportunity to get into a job and get the
experience of work.  
  
The industry response to this initiative has been very encouraging, with the
Motor Trades Association of Australia, representing more than 60,000
automotive businesses nationwide, signalling they will partner in this
initiative. They’re looking to provide internships to 4000 of those job-
seekers. This has been a very well received initiative and it tackles that
challenge, that problem of long-term youth unemployment.  
  
Innovation and advanced manufacturing are also key drivers of our Plan.  
  
Our innovation and science plan will bring more great Australian ideas to
market. Under our $1.1 billion National Innovation and Science Agenda, we are
offering real incentives for start-up companies in the industries on the
frontier of technology.  
  
And its worth reflecting what we’re doing there. We’re providing tax offsets
and we’re providing relief from capital gains tax. Why are we doing that? Why
does everyone agree that is a good approach? Because we know that if you want
more of something, you reduce the tax on it. If you want less of something,
you increase the tax on it. So what we’re doing is we’re reducing tax in order
to promote more investment. And that will deliver more investment.  
  
What Labor is doing, they are increasing taxes on investment and that can have
only one consequence, of less investment and less jobs, less opportunities for
Australians.  
  
Now to succeed in the 21st century, we need to ensure that Australia and
Australians are more innovative, more technologically sophisticated. That is
clear.  
  
Our plan will prepare our children for the jobs of the future with a greater
focus on science, technology, engineering and maths and skills in digital
literacy like coding. Likewise, the investment by my Government in Australia’s
defence industries, is central to our plan to ensure national security and
economic security for generations to come. Under our defence industry plan, 12
offshore patrol vessels will be under construction in two years’ time.
Australian workers building those vessels with Australian steel.  
  
A year later, the building of nine Future Frigates will commence. Then in
2022, we will start construction of the first of 12 regionally superior
submarines, the single biggest investment in our military history.  
  
These projects will drive jobs, growth and innovation for 50 years.  
  
Using the most sophisticated technology in the world, the submarine build
alone creates nearly 3000 direct and indirect jobs in Australia. And it is
vital to understand that our naval shipbuilding program goes well beyond these
projects, well beyond the submarine project. For our advanced manufacturing
sector, the benefits will be decades-long, across the entire national supply
chain.  
  
This is a commitment that puts our opponents to shame.  
  
The Labor-Greens-Independent government cut more than $18 billion from Defence
funding and delayed more than 100 projects.  
  
Our plan – our naval shipbuilding program - will transform our defence
industries and sustain them for decades.  
  
And the benefits of these elements of our Plan, like all of the Plan, begin
right now.  
  
Now let me turn now to Labor’s fiscal fantasy.  
  
Our Labor opponents as you know, are inclined to push their performance
measures out to a 10-year time frame, because they have no way of paying for
the promises they make.  
  
Kevin Rudd gave us a 2020 vision. I might say, it’s been often observed, that
a vision without resources is a hallucination.  
  
[Laughter]  
  
The 2020 vision of Kevin Rudd crumbled in the chaos of the Labor-Greens
minority government debacle. The result was a Budget in structural deficit and
the loss of confidence and certainty in our economic future.  
  
Much like Kevin Rudd, now Bill Shorten wants to take us on a flight of fantasy
to 2026.  
  
Same old Labor. Australians will not be taken for fools.  
  
Mr Shorten could have spared us the gloss and hype of the launch of his
brochure and simply told Australians the unvarnished truth.  
  
After taxing the life out of the economy, Labor still ends up with much bigger
deficits over the next four years - the forward estimates. That is the plain
truth from which they cannot hide.  
  
They cannot or will not tell us how much bigger these deficits will be. Nor
have they, nor can they, offer a credible pathway back to a responsible budget
position.  
  
Bill Shorten jokes about piling more and more funding promises onto his spend-
o-meter.  
  
This is nothing to laugh about. Labor’s reckless approach to our nation’s
public finances would have very serious consequences for the economic security
of all Australians. As we have heard in the warnings this week from prominent
commentators and economists about the risk Labor’s trajectory of increasing
deficits would pose to our credit rating.  
  
Labor’s promise for the next three years is to spend more money we don’t have,
slow economic growth and employment by increasing taxes on business and
investment and as a consequence run higher deficits and run up more debt for
our children and grandchildren to pay off. So much for fairness. Piling more
and more debt on our children and grandchildren to pay off.  
  
Let me paint you a clear picture, by way of contrast, of what Our National
Economic Plan can deliver in the life of the next Parliament. This is not some
over-the-horizon promise. It is our assessment of the positive, practical
gains from a fully costed and funded Plan for jobs and growth to be delivered
over the next three years.  
  
By 2019, over 99.5 per cent of businesses - employing nearly 40 per cent of
working Australians - will be benefiting from our enterprise tax plan. There
will not a big bank, or large multinational among them. For the most part,
these will be locally owned, family run businesses including your local
newsagent or builder.  
  
By 2019, international tourists to Australia will be spending an extra $5
billion a year in real dollars, in our economy, nearly half of this increase
accounted for by tourists from China and India.  
  
By 2019, there will be nearly 100,000 young Australians helped into work by
our PaTH youth employment program.  
  
By 2019, Australia will be shipping 1.1 million tonnes of beef worldwide –
including 170,000 tonnes to China, 294,000 tonnes to Japan, 190,000 tonnes to
Korea and 300,000 tonnes to the United States. This is enough, Barnaby Joyce
assures me, to make 21 billion hamburgers.  
  
[Laughter]  
  
By 2019, our tax cuts for middle income earners will put $2.8 billion back
into the pockets of around two and a half million Australians.  
  
By 2019, the Budget will be well on the way to a responsible surplus, with the
deficit being reduced to $5.9 billion in 2019-20, and returning to surplus the
following year.  
  
And by 2019, because we are living within our means we can ensure the funding
we provide to schools will have grown by a further 26 per cent to $19.8
billion each year.  
  
That is the fundamental distinction between our approach and that of Labor.  
  
Our Plan is set out in the Budget, fully costed and funded.  
  
Our commitments are bankable; our fiscal projections are prudent; and it is
all part of a coherent, carefully-constructed plan that is already delivering
tangible results.  
  
Labor’s alternative program is a leap into the unknown - or perhaps the all
too well known and bitterly remembered. It is the same old Labor, built around
promises they can’t pay for and will never be able to deliver.  
  
The flaw in the Labor Party's thinking is that they assume economic growth and
just take it as a given. They can increase taxes, rack up more debt, spend
more. And none of this, they assume, is going to have any effect on the
economy.  
  
  
  
Let’s not kid ourselves.  
  
  
  
There are plenty of economic risks on the horizon, particularly in the global
economy. There are risks in the things that we can't control, like the price
of iron ore, or growth projections in China, or the stability of the Eurozone.  
  
  
  
But what I know for sure, is that we are best able to deal with these
challenges, if we have a strong and resilient economy, if we have a Government
with strong economic leadership which understands what drives business.  
  
  
  
A government with an economic plan that will encourage investment and
employment. That's the Government I lead. That's the clear plan we have laid
out. That's the plan that will deliver us the jobs and growth in the years
ahead: a strong economy, a resilient economy, backing the enterprise and
commitment of Australians.  
  
  
  
Only a sustainable budget, built on strong economic growth, can deliver
Australians the services they want and expect, like guaranteed funding for
health, education and infrastructure.  
  
  
  
Neither Labor nor their friends the Greens or Independents, have a credible
plan to deal with the economic challenges of this the 21st century. Our Labor
opponents have nothing to say about generating investment and enterprise. They
have nothing to say about securing prosperity today, or forging the growth of
the industries and jobs of the future.  
  
  
  
Labor’s only plan is to impose $100 billion in additional taxes over the next
10 years.  
  
  
  
They are proposing taxes which will actively slow economic growth. Labor’s
policies would kill incentive, damage jobs and stop the successful transition
of the our economy dead in its tracks.  
  
Let's be quite clear about this. You want more investment; you lower the tax
on investment.  
  
As I said a moment ago, that is why we recently all voted to provide capital
gains tax relief and offsets to encourage people to invest in start-up
companies. That’s why we provide tax incentives for research and development.
It’s obvious, that’s why taxes have been increased and imposed over many years
on tobacco- to discourage people from smoking. If you want less of something
you increase the tax on it. Labor plainly wants less investment. And that
means less growth, less jobs.  
  
They’re planning to ban negative gearing - the ability of working Australians
to invest and offset losses against their personal wage or salary income.  
  
They're banning negative gearing on every single asset class - shares,
business, property, commercial property, residential property - except for new
dwellings.  
  
So what’s that going to do? That also restricts and reduces investment.  
  
You reduce investment, you reduce growth and jobs.  
  
What about capital gains tax? That is a classic tax on investment and they are
going to increase it by 50 per cent. Has only one result- again, less
investment.  
  
Now this is what awaits Australians, should we return to the chaos of a Labor-
Greens alliance. Less investment, less jobs, less confidence, less economic
growth and more uncertainty. A less secure future for all of us, but
especially for those for whom we should be acting with the greatest fiduciary
trust- the greatest and deepest responsibility. Our children and our
grandchildren. Labor renders their future insecure, and uncertain.  
  
We are ensuring with every element of our plan, that their future is secured.
That there will be greater opportunities for them to start a business, to find
a new job, to find a better job. For them to seize the opportunities of the
hour. We are creating that environment with an economic plan- every element of
which will deliver stronger economic growth and jobs. And our opponents seem
determined to go in precisely the opposite direction.  
  
This is a very clear choice. And so as pre-poll voting opens in the next few
days, I urge all Australians to think very carefully, about the choice they
are to make.  
  
Just a few thousand votes across a handful of seats will decide if the Greens
and Independents will be once again calling the shots in a Shorten-Greens
minority government.  
  
A vote for any candidate other than a Coalition candidate is a vote for this
chaos.  
  
We have seen the effect of this dysfunction in the Senate, with vital economic
reforms being blocked by Labor, Greens and the independents.  
  
That is why I called this double dissolution election.  
  
Restoring the rule of law in our construction industry through the restoration
of the Australian Building and Construction Commission, is an essential reform
if Australians are to have the infrastructure they need at a price they can
afford – from hospitals and schools, to office towers or apartment blocks.  
  
Labor, the Greens and cross-benchers blocked this reform twice in the Senate,
despite evidence to the Heydon Royal Commission showing widespread malfeasance
by union officials on construction sites across the country.  
  
At the latest count, there are more than 100 officials of the CFMEU before
courts and tribunals on more than a thousand charges over breaches of
industrial law.  
  
Bill Shorten in Government set up the RSRT with the express objective of
putting owner drivers out of business to benefit large trucking companies
whose employees were members of the TWU.  
  
And it worked. 50,000 owner drivers were off the road, they were out of
business, their families had no income.  
  
Thankfully we were, just, able to abolish that Tribunal and keep those
families in business. But make no mistake if Labor wins this election, as it
did before, the RSRT will be back - the Transport Workers Union will demand
and will get its reward and family businesses once again will be the losers.  
  
And, now, in Victoria, unfolding we see an outrageous attempt by the Andrews
Labor Government and the United Firefighters Union to impose an effective
takeover by the union of the Country Fire Authority volunteers.  
  
Like the SES, like the Surf Lifesavers Associations, the CFA volunteers are
vital to the fabric of our community.  
  
We have been reminded of the selfless service of our volunteers this very
week.  
  
And that is why we are committed to standing shoulder to shoulder with the
volunteers and amending the Fair Work Act to protect volunteer organisations,
like the CFA, from union takeovers.  
  
That is why it is so important Australians consider their vote very carefully
at this election, for both the Senate and the House of Representatives.  
  
Every single vote for the Nick Xenophon Team, the Independents or Labor or the
Greens brings us closer to Bill Shorten and The Greens running Australia.  
  
That would mean Labor’s tax hikes on investment, the Greens tax hikes on
superannuation, and Nick Xenophon’s tax hikes on traded goods.  
  
So now is not the time for a protest vote or a wasted vote; it is the time to
use your vote in support of a strong economic plan – and to prevent a hung
parliament that would bring government and our economic transition to a
grinding halt, costing jobs and imperilling our future.  
  
If you want a better future for yourself and your family, don’t risk yet
another change of government, yet another Labor Prime Minister and the chaos
of yet another minority government.  
  
The only way to ensure that there is continued, strong, stable government with
a clear national economic plan is to vote for the Coalition in both houses.  
  
With your vote we can complete the job we’ve started, stick to our economic
plan for jobs and growth – and together we can make Australia stronger and our
future more secure.  
  
Thank you very much.  
  
