Mr TURNBULL (Wentworth—Minister for Communications) (16:24): The Tax and
Superannuation Laws Amendment (Employee Share Schemes) Bill 2015 addresses one
of the most damaging acts of the previous Labor government. It did not involve
the wasting of tens of billions of dollars like the NBN project did, but what
it did do was potentially cost Australia billions of dollars. We will never
know what it did cost, but, by changing the law on employee share schemes and
options schemes in 2009, what the Labor government did was to stifle
innovation and disincentivise start-up companies.  
  
The reality is that nobody knows when a new idea or a new company will be
successful or not. Everyone thinks they do; they think that their new project
is going to make them rich but, regrettably, most projects do not succeed,
even more are pretty mediocre and only a handful do really well. But it is
that eternal optimism and entrepreneurship and that spirit of adventure and
innovation that drives our economy. All of the laws that we pass here and all
of the great speeches we give are fine, but what really makes Australia great,
and what provides the jobs and the security for Australians in the future, is
the energy and enterprise of thousands of Australians. I think all of us,
whatever our politics, know in our hearts that that is right.  
  
Some people in this place think that the government can tell business how to
be innovative and can provide business tips. Oddly enough, the side that
thinks that is the Labor Party, which is least qualified to do so. But on our
side we believe that government's role is not to tell citizens, let alone
businesses, what is best, but rather to enable them to do their best. One of
the important things we should do is to make sure that we remove as many
obstacles to enterprise and entrepreneurship as we can; in other words, to
clear the way for that spirit of enterprise to take off. That is one of the
reasons the Abbott government has been so assiduous in cutting regulation and
red tape wherever we can, and we will continue to do that. I hope that the
governments that follow us in the years and the decades to come will do the
same, because there has always been a tendency for governments to create new
regulation as new issues arise, but to fail to prune away the regulation that
is no longer needed or is no longer fit for purpose.  
  
In any new enterprise, and indeed in existing enterprises, it is absolutely
critical to incentivise the staff, the team; and the best way to do that is to
give them a sense of co-ownership. Again, who would argue with that? One of
the ways that that is done in a modern economy is to provide employees with
shares or, very often, with options to acquire shares in the future. The hope
is that that gives them a feeling that they have got some skin in the game and
that they are not just working for wages or some cash remuneration. That is
absolutely critical, particularly with start-up companies, because the reality
is that, with a start-up, generally funds are scarce; what little money is
available is generally going into the acquisition of necessary resources and
equipment and so forth. The people are generally working for below market
remuneration, and their upside is expected to come if the project is a big
hit. Of course, as we know, often it is not, but sometimes it is. So hope
springs eternal, and hence the ability to incentivise your team is absolutely
critical.  
  
  
  
It is practically beyond belief that something as important as this to the
economy of enterprise and innovation and entrepreneurship would have been
attacked by the Labor Party in 2009. The effect of the changes that were made
to employee share and option schemes was that employees became liable to
taxation upon being granted options and being granted rights to shares even
though they had no means of realising the value of what they were being given.
You would have to be very confident to go off to the bank and borrow money,
take out another mortgage on your house or pay tax on some options you had
been given in a start-up company. Yes, it might be the next Facebook—there is
always the possibility of that—but more likely than not it is not going to be
anything of the kind.  
  
This was a change that was absolutely calculated to kill employee share and
option schemes dead. If that was the intent, it worked. It was as though the
previous government had asked themselves, 'What is the stake that we can drive
into the heart of Australian innovation?' They found out, and it worked
perfectly. Big companies could spend a lot of money on lawyers and accountants
to structure things and get around the rules—there were not many that did that
although I know a few did—but the start-up sector basically stopped giving
their employees shares and options as incentives. That obviously reduced their
ability to attract talented people and, as I think all honourable members who
have taken an interest in this matter know—I acknowledge the member for
Chifley sitting opposite me at the table, who on the Labor side has taken a
keen interest in innovation—this became a huge issue with the start-up sector.
Whenever you spoke to people in the start-up sector, particularly in the
technology area, this was the one big complaint they had.  
  
Yesterday in a matter of public importance discussion the member for Blaxland,
the shadow minister for communications, referred to an Australian entrepreneur
in Silicon Valley, Tan Le, and how he had been inspired by her—so he should
have been; she has a really inspiring story. During my visits to Silicon
Valley in recent years, and I think everyone has shared the same experience,
the big complaint from Australian companies over there has been this
extraordinary tax treatment of employee shares and options that the Labor
Party imposed. By the way, that is entirely at odds with global practice.
Everywhere else in the world, one way or another tax is paid—often at a
concessional rate, but it is paid—when the employee either realises the share
or the option or is able to realise it; in other words, when a share becomes
liquid and tradeable. That makes perfect sense because then the employee can
realise the security that he or she has been given and pay the tax. This was
the biggest single concern that people had. Even though it was attacked by the
technology sector, the start-up sector, from the time the changes were made in
2009—and that criticism became more and more intense—it is remarkable and
tells you how deaf the Labor Party has been to the spirit of enterprise and
the spirit of innovation so critical to our economic future that they made no
efforts to change the law. They could simply have turned around and said,
'Whoops, we have made a mistake, let's reverse it,' but they did not.  
  
Mr Husic: We did.  
  
Mr TURNBULL: The honourable member opposite me says they did. That is
remarkable. If the bad law in 2009 was repealed, I wonder why we are going to
the trouble of debating this bill today. The Labor Party did nothing about it.
They made no change to the law; they wrung their hands but we are here
actually getting the changes made.  
  
This is a very important reform, starting from 1 July, in the new financial
year, that will bring the Australian regime on employee shares and options
into line with global practice. It will basically ensure that there will be no
up-front taxation of employee shares and options. It will increase the
deferral period—the taxing point—from seven years to 15 years. There will be
no taxation on the grant of an option. Taxation will occur when the employee
exercises the option, and after exercising the option there is no real risk of
forfeiting the underlying share and restrictions on the sale of the share have
been lifted. There are special tax concessions to employees on the grant of
shares and options in smaller start-up companies, and that is very important
too. It shows the concern the government has. I know honourable members are
familiar with these points, but eligible start-ups that have an aggregate
turnover of less than $50 million, are unlisted and have been incorporated for
less than 10 years will be allowed to issue shares to employees at a small
discount, up to 15 per cent, and issue options on very advantageous
conditions. Options that have been allocated at a discount will not be subject
to up-front taxation, as I noted, as long as they are held by the employee for
at least three years. That means, therefore, that employees will only have to
pay tax when they actually have some value that they can realise, when they
can get some cash in their pocket to pay it. These start-ups will benefit by
having gains on options taxed as a capital gain and not as income and
therefore taxed at the lower concessional rate.  
  
I know, as the Minister for Small Business noted in his second reading speech,
that there have been some concerns, or complaints if you like, from the
industry that these changes could and should go further.  
  
  
  
There is concern that taxation is payable, or a taxing point is realised, when
an employee leaves his employment. There is of course, as the minister said in
the second reading speech, the right to have any tax paid refunded if it turns
out that there was in fact no gain realised on the shares at the time they are
actually granted and become liquid. These are fair comments, and I hope that
the government, over time, will be able to further improve and refine this
legislation. The important thing is that our approach to the innovation sector
is one of enablement. We are making these very important changes in the
bill—and we appreciate the support of honourable members for that—but we will
continue to seek to improve legislation and regulation that affects start-ups
and innovation generally so that, all the time, we can be proactively
improving the environment for Australian innovation, upon which our future
prosperity depends. In other words, none of this should be regarded as set and
forget.  
  
This is a really important first step. It is going to make a very big change
to the start-up sector. It will result in thousands of additional jobs being
created and millions of dollars—perhaps billions of dollars—of additional
value being created in Australia. We will never know the exact numbers, but
the bottom line is that anything that can enable innovation in Australia has
got to be good for our economy and, indeed, for all Australians—and that is
what this bill does. Together with the minister and my colleagues, I commend
this bill to the House.