Thank you Alan very much for your warm welcome, and Gerard, and Andrew Barr
the ACT Chief Minister and everyone gathered here for this very special night.
Lucy and I are delighted to be here.  
  
It is wonderful to open the Tom Roberts Exhibition. Tom Roberts of course was
one of the great painters of the Heidelberg School along with Fred McCubbin,
Arthur Streeton and Charles Edward Conder among others. They, in some
respects, actually imagined Australian art. They were dealing with a culture
and a country that had not really reflected on its own identity before.  
  
If you think of the United States, so many of the colonists, European
colonists, came there self-consciously or very consciously to create a new
world. They were pilgrims they were fleeing persecution. They were seeking to
create some kind of Utopia.  
  
Australians came here with different motives. Some came unwillingly. All of
Lucy and I’s Victorian friends remind us that everyone in Sydney is descended
from convicts. Our repost of course, is to remind them that Melbourne of
course is a Tasmanian colony. As for the ‘bush capital’ as Andrew Barr says,
“it’s the coolest little capital in the world,” and I think that’s fantastic.
It certainly feels that way when I ride my bike around the lake in the winter.  
  
So, Roberts opened the eyes of his contemporaries to the real beauty of our
Australian landscape and above all to the light. It was obviously a very, very
different light to that of Northern Europe and England in particular. More
Italian but thoroughly un-English in that respect.  
  
He helped create, as I mentioned earlier something of the Arcadian myth that
Russel Ward wrote about years ago, the bush legend. That Arcadian myth - the
Australian-ness being epitomised with the bush that the poets wrote about. Of
course, it has always been somewhat of a myth because we have been right from
the foundation a highly urbanised society. It’s really only places like
Singapore that are more urbanised than Australia. But something that is alive
in the imagination is just as real. This is what the Australian artists
whether they were poets or painters appropriated.  
  
Of course some of his best loved works here, we’ve mentioned some of them,
Coming South, Bailed Up, Shearing the Rams, Bourke Street West, showing
ordinary Australians working the land going about their lives. His fantastic
painting of Coogee which is not quiet in my electorate, but just to the south
of it.  
  
You never know some year there will be a redistribution. We could move south.
Not in the current one.  
  
But a beautiful painting and there’s that wonderful painting called Sydney
Harbour from Milson’s Point and the seaman’s hospital or home is still visible
on the rock side and the outline of customs house, other than that everything
is different. In fact it shows the old gun battery at Dawe’s Point which of
course has been, since the 1930s, been covered by the foundation of the
bridge.  
  
But the big political painting here is what you would call the big picture, or
more grandly and accurately, the opening of the first Parliament of the
Commonwealth of Australia by His Royal Highness the Duke of Cornwell and York
on the 9th of May 1901. Now, I gather he paid a thousand guineas for it plus
an extra guinea for every individual portrait he painted and the director
showing that the real incentives for artistic expression are not just
aesthetic he painted 269 individual portraits.  
  
The painting was presented to King Edward the XII and was hung in St James
Palace for many years and when it returned home a dedicated space was
allocated in the very heart of the new Parliament House building, as I am sure
you will know, in the foyer of the main committee room.  
  
That’s why this is not just exhibition of important works by one of our great
artists it’s a reflection of who we are, where we have come from, where we
have imagined we have come from. A way of life that in many ways is gone, but
which is alive still in our sense of identity. It has contributed so much to
our national character.  
  
He and his colleagues in that Heidelberg School and of course the poets as
well, didn’t just record or portray Australia, in many ways they imagined it
and of course they made it real.  
  
So I want to thank everyone that made this exhibition possible. I want to
acknowledge the generosity of a number of you here today.  
  
Philanthropy in the arts is absolutely vital. Some of you may have heard me
say this before, but it is worth repeating. A dollar from a generous
benefactor and a dollar from the Government buys you exactly the same amount.
You don’t get any more with that philanthropic dollar. But that philanthropic
dollar comes to you not via the dim eyelids of the Expenditure Review
Committee of Cabinet, it comes to you with passion, love and advocacy.  
  
I want to acknowledge the generosity of Krystyna Campbell-Pretty, Alan and
Mavourneen Cowen, and Kerry and Christine Stokes who have helped the National
Gallery secure the recent purchase of Tom Roberts’ never-before-seen portrait
of his friend Louis Abrahams. I understand that Ms Campbell-Pretty’s donation
is in memory of Harold - can I say, what a lovely tribute to your late
husband.  
  
This is the first time that the portrait has left the Abrahams family since
Roberts gave it to Louis. This is a genuine coup for the national collection.
The gallery’s major re-hang, which coincides with the Tom Roberts exhibition,
is also timely, especially as it brings a greater focus to the Australian
collection.  
  
And we have much of which to be proud— the Indigenous art that links us to our
ancient history, and of which we were reminded in the Chairman’s and
Director’s acknowledgment to country, and works by artists, like Tom Roberts,
show the next part of our journey as a nation.  
  
Congratulations to the staff of the National Gallery - our national collection
has never looked better, and I urge everybody to visit the gallery and see for
themselves. It belongs to you. So with great pleasure I declare the Tom
Roberts exhibition open.  
  
Thank you.