Malcolm Turnbull delivered the following address to the CeBIT Australia
e-government conference in Sydney on Tuesday, May 6.  
  
Good morning.  
  
Thank you Harvey for your introduction, and to everyone including the NSW
Minister for Innovation, Victor Dominello, and the acting CEO of the Digital
Transformation Office, David Hazelhurst, for being here this morning.  
  
Introduction  
  
So here's the big picture.  
  
Australians overall enjoy a relatively high standard of living. Our wages are
among the highest in the world and consequently so are our costs.  
  
But how do we maintain that high standard of living in a world being
transformed by convergence and globalisation amplified by information
technology?  
  
By convergence I mean the way in which developing economies which had hitherto
competed for low cost, low skill jobs are now competing for the most skilled,
producing the most sophisticated and advanced products. Globalisation powered
by the Internet means many businesses and jobs which used not to be trade
exposed - think of retail, media, professional services - now are. The
globalisation of supply chains means that at every stage of production there
is more contestability than ever.  
  
Convergence and globalisation offers much more competition, but it also offers
much more opportunity. As more and more of our market becomes accessible to
global competitors so does a larger and far wealthier global market become
accessible to us.  
  
At the same time in common with other developed economies, and some developing
ones, we face the challenges of:  
  
It is widely recognised, not least by the IMF, that Australia has a structural
Budget deficit so clearly we need to get spending under control.  
  
But this in itself will not secure our future prosperity. Sustained economic
growth is needed to grow wages and lift our standard of living. So how do we
realise this?  
  
The key to our future prosperity is to be faster, leaner, more productive,
more innovative and more collaborative. Above all to be more agile, to
recognise that we are living in the most exciting, dynamic, disruptive time in
human history, and that the volatility and unpredictability driven by
technology and rapid change must be embraced not ignored.  
  
We cannot proof ourselves against the future in the sense of building a wall
or a dyke of some kind to hold back the future. We embrace the future, we make
volatility our friend, not our enemy. We change our business culture so that
it is more receptive to innovation, more receptive to different ways of doing
things; no longer saying ‘not invented here’, no longer being so deferential,
and above all, never saying ‘we’ve always done it this way’.  
  
Innovation is critical to our economic prosperity; the latest Australian
Innovation System report showed that the 42 per cent of domestic businesses
that innovate account for around 70 per cent of the economy’s employment,
capital expenditure and business income, and more than 80 per cent of total
Internet income.  
  
But our performance on innovation is slipping behind other developed nations.
We rank second last of 17 OECD countries on new-to-the-world innovation. The
proportion of researchers working for Australian businesses is lower than in
comparable countries so they need to collaborate more with universities, where
the bulk of researchers are employed.  
  
Digital disruption and the role of government  
  
While the Internet has been disrupting legacy business models for some time,
the most significant change is the way mass connectivity has combined with
mobility and modern processing power to disrupt non-traded sectors.  
  
Take Airbnb. In less than three years it has added more than 10,000 rooms to
Sydney’s holiday rental market without a single brick being laid or planning
permit being approved. In seven years Airbnb has added more than one million
rooms globally, compared to the century old Hilton chain’s 700,000 hotel
rooms.  
  
With more than 1.75bn smartphones in use globally, most people expect to be
able to access services and information from almost any location, at any time
of the day.  
  
If you can order a pizza, taxi or pair of shoes through an app and monitor the
status of these items through to delivery, or complete all of your banking
through a smartphone, it’s not unreasonable to expect government to make its
services as widely available.  
  
Government needs to embrace change and adapt in-line with the expectations of
its customers.  
  
While government isn’t exposed to competition in the traditional sense - it
has a monopoly on many of the services it delivers - if it seeks to remain
relevant to people’s everyday lives then it must be flexible and nimble,
capable of embracing new technologies to disrupt the way it delivers public
services. And of course governments, or at least their political masters, face
the ultimate disruption every three to four years at the ballot box so it’s in
our interests to adapt and embrace change.  
  
Remember the government sector is at least a third of the economy, so by
delivering digital services that are easier to access and simpler to use,
people will not only save time when dealing with government, the whole economy
will be more efficient.  
  
Digital Transformation Office  
  
We should aim to become the world's leading digital economy.  
  
This won’t happen if the government continues writing strategies on the
importance of the digital economy, but it can happen if we lead by example.
Government needs to embrace new technologies, leverage data and innovate the
way public services are delivered.  
  
So we’ve established a Digital Transformation Office to deliver services that
focus squarely on the customer. The DTO has not been established to chase
savings - they will inevitably follow if services are so efficient and easy to
use that customers seek them out ahead of less efficient delivery channels
such as over the counter. The DTO will design services that are simpler and
more straightforward. And they will be delivered digitally by default, meaning
that anyone will be able to access services from start to finish online using
their mobile device.  
  
And all new and redesigned services will need to comply with the recently
developed Digital Service Standard.  
  
The DTO will incorporate a large number of projects. Immediate priorities
include:  
  
Check out the DTO blog at www.dto.gov.au for more detail but let me touch on a
few of these projects briefly.  
  
Establishing a robust, economy wide digital identity is central to the
government’s digital agenda. The trusted digital identity framework will
establish a set of principles and standards for the use of accredited
government and third-party digital identities across government. It will also
involve the use of a voiceprint to access services through telephony and
mobile channels.  
  
The ‘tell us once’ functionality will enable individuals and businesses to
update their contact details with the government once and choose to share this
information with other relevant agencies seamlessly through myGov.  
  
And grants administration will be streamlined by developing a simpler grants
administration system across government. The top 12 granting agencies in our
government, which deliver over 90 per cent of grants funding by value, will
transition to two IT systems - down from 15.  
  
The siloed approach to IT investment and service delivery across the public
service is letting taxpayers down. Many agencies are delivering good services,
but they’re delivering them in isolation or as though they’re a standalone
business.  
  
The DTO will overcome these limitations by taking an across agency - or whole-
of-government - approach to investing in common IT platforms that can be used
by every agency.  
  
I’ve already touched on the example of grants administration, but there are
many others, including significant duplication in Enterprise Resource Planning
systems - more than 200 systems, all performing similar functions, have been
identified across the public service.  
  
We will work with agencies to identify opportunities to rationalise
duplicative and wasteful IT spending. We need to learn from past mistakes.  
  
Next steps  
  
Governments across the world are at varying stages of their digital
transformations so the DTO has an opportunity to collaborate with the world’s
leading digital economies. These include, but are by no means limited to the
D5 - Estonia, Israel, New Zealand, South Korea and the UK, as well as state
and local governments in Australia. I have spoken to Victor Dominello, the NSW
Minister for Innovation, and we’re on a unity ticket on the need to
collaborate.  
  
We will also make myGov available to all other state and local governments at
no cost, other than those associated with the initial onboarding.  
  
The DTO, and all other parts of government for that matter, should never be
arrogant enough to believe that Canberra has all the answers.  
  
The DTO will also collaborate with business and the research sector, and I
will have more to announce on this topic as the year progresses.  
  
Now let me touch on a couple of the next steps.  
  
The DTO is working with the public and government agencies to identify a small
number of exemplar services to disrupt, redesign and put in the hands of users
to critique. We’ll start with a handful of them - perhaps three or four. The
idea is to start small but think big.  
  
The emphasis will be on agile design and nimble development. Projects will be
delivered over short, 90-day cycles. This means that the alpha and beta
services won’t be perfect, but it’s a fundamental shift to the way government
has done things in the past. This change should be seen as an opportunity, not
a risk, and will require a fundamental shift in culture. The DTO needs to be
more like a startup in its attitude, tossing aside the rules based,
regrettably blame based, often, culture of the public service to one that
embraces and rewards principles and values.  
  
By releasing new services to the public sooner, we can test them in the real
world and customers can provide feedback directly. Using advanced analytics,
we can spot trends and glean insights that simply wouldn’t be possible under
the traditional approach.  
  
We will soon release a consultation platform on the DTO website so I encourage
everyone to be involved. We’ll also develop a public facing dashboard, which
will report on the progress of projects and investments. A prototype will be
developed over the coming months.  
  
Conclusion  
  
The DTO may well be one of the most exciting projects the public service ever
undertakes.  
  
Its ambition is lofty and its scope is wide. But at its core is a commitment
to delivering better outcomes for the people who access government services -
which is all of us, at least once a year.  
  
The DTO’s mission is to improve the customer experience for citizens and
businesses when dealing with government. We will achieve this by designing
services that are simpler and easier to use.  
  
The key is to focus with a laser like attention on the customer. That is the
key – make that customer experience more engaging, more valuable, more
interesting, easier to undertake. The savings will follow inevitably. Digital
transactions are so much cheaper than over the phone transactions, postal
transactions or over the counter transactions, if you make your digital
platform as engaging as possible for the citizen, and you just think about the
citizen, think about your customer, then you’ll have a lot more happy
customers and your savings will follow.  
  
This is a very important change because very often as you know changes to IT
in government have been focused on cost cutting, how can we save money, and it
has been very inward looking, how can we make it easier for us, the
government? How can we simplify what we do? The critical thing is to focus on
the customer.  
  
I believe we can achieve all of this through a stronger commitment to
innovation and collaboration and I hope and I expect that you will join us on
this exciting journey.  
  
We are determined, and I know there is the same level of commitment at every
level of government around the country, to transform government so that it
serves the citizen in the most compelling and engaging manner possible.  
  
Thank you.  
  
[1] From the Iconic  
  
[2] From the ABS (Feb 2014):  
  
[3] ACMA Communications Report  
  
[4] Australian Connected Consumer Report, (pp 49-50)