I'm really delighted to be here with Kelly to launch the One Million Donors
Program. I'd encourage, since we're in Canberra, government departments to
embrace workplace giving, for everybody to embrace workplace giving, and to
introduce their own programs to that effect. And well done JB Hi-Fi in that
regard.  
  
As a Government, we are very keen to support individuals to participate in,
and to commit to, charitable giving. As Kelly noted, Lucy and I have supported
the Australian Charities Fund for some time and we are passionate believers in
the power of philanthropy.  
  
A good question is, Why should we support charities, schools, libraries,
hospitals, galleries and research projects? This altruistic impulse is often
described as giving back. But, that seems a little bit inadequate to me. After
all, it's not like giving a book back to a friend from whom you've borrowed –
although in my experience, most people don't give books back. So, that's a
kind of involuntary philanthropy.  
  
But the whole point of philanthropy is that it is not reciprocal. It is the
voluntary surrender of something that is yours, purely for the benefit of
others. And it is a critically important part of our social integrity, of our
social cohesion. It's a very conservative - and I don't use that in a
political sense - it is a very conservative instinct because it seeks to
conserve the strength of our society. And Edmund Burke, the great 18th Century
conservative writer saw this very clearly when he wrote of society as being a
partnership between those of the living, those that are dead, and those that
are yet to be born - seeing that chain of continuity, that human continuity.
And this is where philanthropy is very important. Now, a lot of people will
say to you well, don't we have a tax system to do this? Don't we have
governments to do that? And there's no doubt governments have the deepest
pockets because they, by force of law, can reach into your pockets. So there's
no question about the scale. But there is a fundamental difference: a dollar
from a private donor, whether it's a corporation or an individual, is of a
quite different quality, even if of the same quantity, as a dollar from
government. Because a dollar given by an individual is wrapped in love. It is
a personal commitment. It is not a bureaucratic grant, it is something that
somebody has made out of an instinct, the most basic, most important human
instinct of all: That of love. And, of course, from the point of view of a
charity, hospital or a school, getting philanthropic support is so valuable
not just because of the money, but because what it does is it builds up a
community of advocates. Every single person who you raise money from as a
charity will become your spokesman, your advocate, your ambassador. And that
makes you stronger, it makes you better connected into the community. And, you
know there are so many good examples, and so many examples that all of us have
been involved with over the years where you can see that that is true. I think
that there are big cultural differences. Not all cultures in all countries are
as philanthropic as others. I'll give you a theory -- I'll give you Turnbull's
utterly non-peer reviewed theory on philanthropy and the cultural differences
thereof, because I've observed it over the years. A lot of people would say,
why are Americans perceived as being more philanthropic, more generous if you
like, than Australians? Well that is changing. Bob Hughes, if he were alive,
here with us today, would say well it's very simple Australia was founded as a
jail, and America was founded as a religious experiment. But while droll, like
most of Bob's observations, I don't know that that's the answer. In our
country, which was founded as a government venture, if you like, historically
the vast bulk of the money that has gone to support all of our social
institutions has come from one of three top-down, hierarchical institutions:
The government, the Catholic Church, and the Anglican Church. That has been
the bulk of it. Whereas in the United States, and you see this very well in
Alexis de Tocqueville's 1840s work Democracy in America, very different sort
of social organisation: Very grass roots, bottom up. And there is a tradition
if you wanted to do something, then you had to - whether it was building a
barn, or a school, or whatever - you had to get your neighbours to contribute.
And that is that that's part of a very different culture. That's why, I
believe, the American's are different. And if you want to see a local example
of that, think of the extraordinary philanthropy of the Jewish community. If
you took the Jews out of philanthropy in Australia it would leave a huge hole.
Why are the Jews so generous? My theory is it’s because there is no top-down
hierarchical body. There is no Jewish pope or Jewish organisation that, with
great assets, can make things happen. And so the Jewish community again has
had that sort of grass roots approach, which inculcates a tradition of
philanthropy. It's really important for us to develop that. I'll give you
another example before I sit down of changing attitudes. I was a Rhodes
Scholar – a dime a dozen now in this Parliament, there's at least three of us
and most people think it's got something to do with the infrastructure Budget
nowadays – but anyway, I was a Rhodes Scholar, and the Rhodes Scholarships
were set up by Cecil Rhodes over a century ago. It was a massive bequest, and
there it was. Throughout all of its history the Rhodes Scholarships which were
run in the UK by a very British sort of committee, they had never asked one of
their scholars for a cent. Never ever. So, totally un-American. And then in
the GFC they lost a third of the endowment. Whoops, that was a bit careless!
And for the first time in their history they're actually starting to ask the
Rhodes Scholars to support them, and they're getting a lot of support. And
it's been a really terrific that all the Rhodes Scholars in this building have
made contributions. And it is an interesting example of that very British, and
I think Australian attitude, that you don't actually ask people for support.
But it's changing. Now, this campaign, the Australian Charities Fund, the One
Million Donors launch, is so important. It doesn't matter how much people
give. It's handy to get money in big licks if you're raising it, but small
donations matter. I've just had an experience of this just literally happening
live on the internet now. I'll be in the CEO Sleepout for St Vincents, I do
that every year, so you can donate online to the CEO of your choice. I posted
on Twitter, sent it out to my email list, and I'm pleased to say, the
donations are coming in. Not that I'm competitive or anything like that, but
nonetheless it's competition and a good cause. I’m so pleased to be here. I
congratulate you Kelly and the Australian Charities Fund on your work, and I
wish you every success. Because what you're really doing here, what you're
really doing, is giving love practical form. And that is so important. Thanks
very much.