Local roads and streets in Wentworth will receive an extra $4.433 million for
vital road upgrades through the Federal Government’s Roads to Recovery
Programme over the next two years.  
  
The extra money will flow as a result of the passage through Federal
Parliament of the fuel excise indexation legislation.  
  
Federal Member for Wentworth, Malcolm Turnbull said every cent of the extra
$23 billion revenue raised through the excise over the next decade would be
invested in road infrastructure.  
  
It means an extra $1.105 billion for councils across Australia in the next two
years alone.  
  
“Every resident understands the challenges our region faces with building
necessary roads,” Mr Turnbull said.  
  
“The extra $4.433 million to local councils in Wentworth over the next two
years means they can now invest in more of the road upgrades we need. This
will deliver a tangible benefit and make our roads and streets safer and more
reliable.”  
  
Councils in Wentworth will receive the following funding:  
  
  
  
The extra funding will increase Federal Government funding for Roads to
Recovery from $700 million to $1 billion in 2015-16 and from $350 million to
$1.155 billion in 2016-17.  
  
Mr Turnbull said the Roads to Recovery Programme had been a popular initiative
since the Coalition Government introduced it in 2001.  
  
“This is a massive boost in funding for our region’s road network and I am
looking forward to seeing the additional opportunities this decision will
create for our councils.  
  
“Over its almost 15 year history, Roads to Recovery has funded the repair and
upgrade of more than 45,000 local streets and roads across Australia, the
largest investment in Australia's local roads ever undertaken. This includes
scores of road and street projects in the Wentworth electorate.”  
  
The extra $1.105 billion being pumped into Roads to Recovery will be paid to
councils under the usual formula as part of their regular quarterly payments
without any requirement for councils to match the extra money.