Mr TURNBULL (Wentworth—Minister for Communications) (13:20): I wish to thank
the members who have contributed to this debate on the Telecommunications
Legislation Amendment (Consumer Protection) Bill 2013. An efficient and
responsive consumer protection regime is a vital element of our
telecommunications landscape, particularly—as many honourable members,
including the speaker preceding me, have observed—as Australians increasingly
rely on telecommunications technology to support all of their work and
everyday activities. There used to be a time when we spoke—and we still do, in
fact—of the digital economy. The reality is that the economy is a digital
economy. That is the economy. All of our transactions and all of our commerce
are being conducted, in one way or another, in the digital sphere.  
  
  
  
The various measures outlined in the bill, which I gather has the support of
the House, seek to improve consumer safeguards while reducing the regulatory
burden imposed on the telecommunications industry when developing or altering
its governing codes. The self- and co-regulatory frameworks which form the
foundation of the Telecommunications Act 1997 have served consumers and the
industry well.  
  
But as new devices and technologies enter this dynamic market and consumer
preferences change, traditional regulatory frameworks are at increasing risk
of being left behind by technology. So, importantly, amendments in this bill
will give the companies and organisations that develop these industry codes
additional flexibility to respond more quickly and efficiently to the evolving
telecommunications sector. As honourable members have discussed in this
debate, the particular amendments to the telecommunications act in this bill
will permit industry codes to be varied or revised without the rest of the
code becoming obsolete. The telecommunications industry is a fast changing and
exponentially growing sector. Its co-regulatory framework in which industry,
government and consumer groups work in partnership has to be equally dynamic.
It cannot be always playing catch up; it has to be able to move with the
times. The bill improves transparency and accountability of the industry code
development process by requiring co-developers to publish the draft codes and
variations on the web as well as submissions received from industry and the
public. In addition, the bill incorporates changes to the code developers
reimbursement scheme allowing them to be reimbursed for those costs associated
with varying consumer related industry codes.  
  
A core element of the telecommunications industry self-governance regime is
the telecommunications industry ombudsman scheme. The TIO provides an
independent alternative dispute resolution service for residential and small
business consumers and fixed line mobile and internet services in Australia.
This bill will implement a number of measures to improve the TIO scheme's
effectiveness and efficiency. In particular the bill establishes a performance
framework that will ensure that the TIO scheme complies with fundamental
standards of fairness, equity and efficiency. Importantly, the proposed
amendments will also enable these standards and the entire TIO scheme to be
periodically reviewed and adjusted as community expectations evolve. Finally,
the bill makes amendments to the Do Not Call Register act 2006. The proposed
amendment will empower the Australian Communications and Media Authority,
ACMA, to pursue more effectively those telemarketers and fax marketers which
may be using third parties overseas and other intermediaries to reach the
local consumers in breach of the Do Not Call Register provisions.  
  
16 years ago the Howard government introduced the telecommunications act 1997.
As the honourable member for Bradfield, my parliamentary secretary, reminded
the house just a few moments ago. This enabled a new era of competition in
Australia's telecommunications sector while establishing a comprehensive co-
regulatory framework to protect the interests of consumers. The guiding
principle was progressively to remove regulatory barriers and constraints on
genuinely competitive conduct and actively engage with the telecommunications
sector to transfer much of the responsibility for regulation to the industry
itself. The coalition government, the Abbott government, has vowed to continue
this work of removing red tape and by so doing to continue to lift Australia's
productivity. So this bill is part of a broader package of reforms of the
telecommunications industry. At the heart of those reforms is the consumer.
Everyone in this chamber recognises that Australia needs a world-class
telecommunications network. We may disagree about some engineering issues
about the design and construction of such a network but a critical issue is to
make an honest and adequate appraisal of what consumers face in the network
today.  
  
A number of honourable members have spoken about the NBN project. I want to
remind the house of the way in which the government has approached the NBN
since the election. We undertook that we would tell the Australian people the
truth about the state of the project and what the options were for completing
it, and to do so independently. The NBN Co itself conducted a strategic review
with the assistance of some external experts, including Korda Mentha and the
Boston Consulting Group. It was published just before Christmas. What that
showed is that under Labor's plan for the NBN consumers would have faced
internet price rises of up to 80 per cent and a total funding cost of $73
billion.  
  
Ms MacTiernan interjecting—  
  
Mr TURNBULL: it also showed that the project would take an extra four years to
complete and demonstrated that there were alternative approaches using a range
of technologies which will enable the project to be completed for $31 billion
less in terms of total funding, and years earlier. That is a great outcome for
the consumer because they will get better broadband soon as it will be more
affordable. The honourable member for Perth in her speech, and she has been
interjecting while I have been speaking, asked about technologies for better,
more efficient trenching of cables, fibre-optic cables or any cables, where
they are available. I imagine she was talking about micro trenching
technologies. I can assure the honourable member that both I as the minister
and the NBN Co even more so are very aware of that. But one of the things that
the honourable member should be alert to is that her colleague Senator Conroy
while the minister arranged for the NBN Co to enter into a comprehensive
agreement with Telstra of a take or pay kind whereby the NBN Co is obliged to
use Telstra's ducts and pits and if it does not use the nominated vast
quantity of them to pay them for it nonetheless. So yes, there are in some
areas more cost-effective ways of putting fibre underground than horizontal
drilling and installing new ducts and they can be taken into account. But the
honourable members opposite have to remember that this government is not
dealing with a blank sheet of paper here. We can only play the hand of cards
that we have been dealt and what we have been left with by the previous
government. That has been a shocking mess.  
  
Let me go on in the time available to me to continue to describe the things we
have done. We have ensured that the board now has members who have spent
lifetimes in the telecommunications sector, including Ziggy Switkowski,
chairman and former CEO of Telstra, and Patrick Flannigan in the business of
constructing distributed linear infrastructure.  
  
We now have a very qualified board. We have identified and engaged a new chief
executive, Mr Bill Morrow, who is a very distinguished international telecom
executive, highly regarded around the world as a turnaround specialist in the
telecom sector. So now we have a highly qualified board and, joining us very
shortly, a highly qualified CEO. There is another review going on at the
moment which will be completed in March of the satellite and fixed wireless
part of the project, which faces, as many honourable members know, very, very
serious problems—a mixture of misleading information being provided by the
previous government coupled with what can only be described as bungling or
incompetence in terms of the management of it. That report will be completed
in March. This is a very considerable and expensive mess and, as I have said
many times to honourable members, there are tens of billions of dollars that
will at the end of that day have been wasted because of commitments made and
decisions taken by the Labor government without proper homework.  
  
One of the other things we are doing is conducting a thoroughgoing cost-
benefit analysis. Of course, that should have been done by the previous
government before they embarked on this in the first place, but it is better
late than never. But it would have been better if it had been done at the
outset.  
  
The bottom line is that as far as the NBN project is concerned, the
government's commitment is to be completely transparent and treat the people
of Australia as you would treat the shareholders in a public listed company,
to provide them with timely information about the state of the project and to
in effect open the books of the NBN Co, and we are doing that. Instead of
having to have rollout figures dragged out of the minister with great
difficulty and pain, every week the NBN Co now publishes its latest rollout
figures on its website. Every week they are published there. There will be a
quarterly report done by the NBN Co management on the financial performance
and of course the construction performance of the project. That will be done
by the NBN Co management in exactly the same way as if it were a public listed
company. Maximum transparency is going to be given to this project.  
  
Honourable members should recognise that the failure of the NBN project under
Labor has resulted in so many Australians who had no broadband in 2007 still
not having it today. The truth is that some Australians have very good
broadband—excellent broadband, world-class broadband. Many Australians have
little or no broadband. You would think that, if the government were going to
spend money on a broadband project, it would prioritise those who were in
greatest need. But not only did the Labor government not do that; it did not
even ask the question of where those underserved areas were. So shortly we
will be releasing a set of maps which show those parts of Australia—those
districts, those neighbourhoods, if you like—where broadband services are
good, okay, average and very, very poor. That information will inform the
construction of the NBN so that, as far as practicable, the worst served areas
are prioritised. Our commitment is to prioritise the worst served areas.  
  
Ziggy Switkowski and I went out to Blacktown recently to see some work that
had been committed to and planned under the previous government which showed
the NBN fibre being rolled out in streets where there was not one but two
hybrid fibre co-ax networks. Under the ground there was Telstra's HFC; up on
the poles was Optus's. From either of those networks residents in the street
could order a 100-megabit-per-second service, yet that area was being
prioritised when areas in your electorate, Mr Deputy Speaker Craig Kelly, and
indeed in outer suburban electorates in the big cities were being completely
left behind. The former government did not even bother to ask the question in
a systematic way of where those underserved areas were.  
  
There has been a massive cultural change in the management of the NBN Co. It
is going to be run as a transparent business, being straight with the
Australian people, instead of treating it as a political exercise where any
information it releases has to conform with the minister's political agenda
and not otherwise.  
  
Returning to this bill, the amendments in the bill, the Telecommunications
Legislation Amendment (Consumer Protection) Bill 2013, will ensure the
sustainability of the proven co-regulatory telecommunications framework while
continuing to safeguard the interests of Australian consumers. I commend the
bill to the House.