Mr TURNBULL (Wentworth—Minister for Communications) (09:18): I move: That this
bill be now read a second time.  
  
Introduction  
  
The Communications Legislation Amendment (SBS Advertising Flexibility and
Other Measures) Bill 2015 provides the Special Broadcasting Service with
increased flexibility in the scheduling of advertising and clarifies SBS's
ability to earn revenue through having product placement during programming.  
  
The bill also makes minor technical amendments to the legislation governing
SBS and the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, and repeals various redundant
acts and provisions from the communications portfolio legislation.  
  
SBS advertising  
  
SBS is Australia's multicultural broadcaster, founded, as we were discussing
on Monday, by Malcolm Fraser. It operates under a mixed funding model. While
the majority of SBS's operating budget is funded by the Australian government,
the remainder is drawn from SBS's commercial activities including advertising
and sponsorship.  
  
In 2014 my Department of Communications conducted an efficiency study to
identify savings that could be made in the back-of-house operations of the ABC
and SBS—in other words, savings that could be made without reducing the
resources available for programming.  
  
This study identified an opportunity for SBS to earn additional advertising
revenue without increasing the maximum amount of advertising it was permitted
to show over a 24-hour period.  
  
SBS has a strict limit of five minutes of advertising per hour, which equates
to a maximum of 120 minutes of advertising shown per day. However SBS earns
the majority of its advertising revenue during peak viewing times—between 6 pm
and 10 o'clock at night—or when it broadcasts special events such as the FIFA
World Cup.  
  
This bill will amend the Special Broadcasting Service Act 1991 to allow for a
more flexible approach enabling SBS to show up to 10 minutes of advertising
per hour but within a daily overall limit of 120 minutes.  
  
This will allow SBS to schedule up to 10 minutes of advertising during higher
rating programs to increase its overall advertising revenue, while scheduling
less advertising during other hours so that the 120-minute daily cap is not
exceeded.  
  
The 120-minute daily cap on advertising is still well below the 350 minutes
per day the commercial broadcasters can devote to advertising.  
  
It is important to note that SBS has many programs, particularly sporting
programs, which have natural breaks that are suitable for advertising well in
excess of the five-minute limitation at present.  
  
It is also important to note that the SBS does not currently fill 100 per cent
of the time it has available for advertising across all channels and markets.  
  
This is particularly the case in regional markets where SBS is regularly
unable to fill five minutes of advertising per hour per channel, even during
peak evening viewing times when its higher rating programs are generally
shown. In markets with insufficient demand, the additional flexibility
afforded by the proposed measures is unlikely to result in significant change
to the amount of advertising SBS is able to attract. So the benefit of this
will really be found in the metropolitan markets.  
  
Product placement  
  
The ABC and SBS efficiency study also identified an opportunity for SBS to
earn additional revenue through the use of product placement within particular
types of programming, such as food programs and sporting programs.  
  
Product placement is widely used by broadcasters to earn additional revenue
and subsidise the cost of content production.  
  
SBS currently broadcasts acquired programming which already contains product
placement from agreements made to the benefit of third parties, prior to SBS's
consideration of the program.  
  
However, SBS does not use product placement in its own commissioned programs
due to a lack of clarity in the SBS Act regarding its use. A significant
portion of SBS's prime-time schedule, of course, does not lend itself to
integrated branding such as Insight and other documentaries. However
commissioned food and sport programming, for example, can provide
opportunities for branded content.  
  
The bill amends the SBS Act to specifically allow SBS to earn revenue through
having product placement in its programming. It also requires the SBS board to
develop and publicise guidelines regarding the use of product placement and
report on its use and earnings in the annual report. The same requirement
exists in the SBS Act for the use of advertising and sponsorship
announcements.  
  
Financial impact of advertising changes  
  
In the short term, additional advertising revenue will be directed towards
meeting the government's efficiency savings applied to SBS from 2015-16. If
the SBS advertising measures in the bill are not passed before the end of this
financial year, the SBS will need to find other ways to achieve the necessary
savings, which it has indicated may involve reductions in programming and/or
services.  
  
In the longer term, the government's intention from these changes is that SBS
becomes a stronger and more sustainable broadcaster. Advertising flexibility
strengthens SBS by making it less dependent on government and helps secure its
future and its independence.  
  
It is anticipated that the SBS advertising measures will result in an increase
in SBS's advertising revenue of $28.5 million over four years from 2015-16. In
later years, if they exceed that run rate, the additional revenues can be
directed towards delivering more distinctive and innovative content and
services in line with its charter responsibilities.  
  
Additional revenue earned by SBS is highly unlikely to have a material impact
on the advertising revenue of the commercial television broadcasting industry,
which totalled $3.9 billion in 2013-14. SBS is, in advertising terms, a minnow
in that market.  
  
Since the introduction of in-programming advertising on SBS in 2006-07, SBS's
advertising revenue has increased, peaking at $72.3 million in 2009-10 and
$73.4 million in 2013-14, due to advertising associated with the 2010 and 2014
world cups. Advertising revenue, for example, in the previous year 2012-13 was
$58 million.  
  
When you compare that to the $3.9 billion earned by commercial television
advertising overall, honourable members can see that an increase in SBS
advertising is really of very small significance to the commercial television
sector. Needless to say, they are not welcoming this change  
  
I have to say that the forecasts of additional advertising revenue that this
change will deliver for SBS, while still very small in the context of the
overall pool of commercial television advertising revenue is, in any event,
unrealistic in our view and in SBS's view.  
  
It is important to note that those two highest revenue results for SBS, that
is to say in 2009-10 and 2013-14, constituted less than two per cent of the
commercial television industry's revenue for the respective financial years.  
  
The steady growth of SBS advertising revenue over this period has not
historically led to a reduction in overall commercial advertising revenues for
free-to-air television.  
  
That is likely because of the continued growth of the entire television
advertising spend over the period, which has significantly outstripped the
growth in SBS's own advertising revenues.  
  
I acknowledge the opposition to this bill from the commercial television
networks; they are under pressure from new entrants to the advertising market
that are available over the top or on the internet. This is particularly the
case with reaching younger people. The median age of prime-time television
viewers is considerably older than the median age of the Australian
population.  
  
The last figures that I have seen—and they are the best that we have
available—showed the median age, for example, for prime-time viewers of the
ABC was 61. So, half the audience of prime-time ABC viewers is over 61. The
median age for viewers of, for example, the Seven and Nine networks is in the
high to late 40s. The median age of the Australian population, I believe, is
around 36 or 37.  
  
The challenge for the free-to-air television industry, whether it is
commercial or public broadcasters, is that younger demographics are not
watching free-to-air linear television as much and they are getting access to
their video content over the top, over the internet on catch-up platforms. Of
course, with the entrance of new global players like Netflix that trend will
continue.  
  
So the challenges, the pressures, on the commercial television industry—for
which we have great respect and regard and which I am very familiar with, as
honourable members know, from my previous life—are not coming from SBS. They
should not be worried about SBS. Their issues are essentially online and
changes to television viewing habits and the way in which all of us consume
content.  
  
Miscellaneous legislative changes to the ABC and SBS acts  
  
The bill also makes minor technical amendments to the Australian Broadcasting
Corporation Act 1983 and the principal SBS Act to provide consistency with
other broadcasting legislation and to remove redundant provisions.  
  
The amendments involve the insertion of some broadcasting definitions and
terms in the SBS Act to make it consistent with the Broadcasting Services Act
1992 and the ABC Act, and to reflect SBS activities that are provided in the
current converging digital environment. It also removes redundant definitions
in the ABC and SBS acts about election periods.  
  
Repealing spent provisions from communications portfolio legislation  
  
In addition, the bill repeals a range of provisions from communications
portfolio legislation which are spent or otherwise unnecessary. Repealing
unnecessary legislation within the communications portfolio will ensure
regulation only remains in force for as long as it is needed and that
remaining legislation is easily accessible.  
  
Conclusion  
  
The government is introducing the bill at this time to allow for any inquiry
into the proposed legislation, which would involve a call for submissions and
potentially a public hearing, to be completed prior to the winter sittings. As
stated previously, it is important that the SBS advertising measures are
passed before the end of this financial year to allow SBS to generate
additional revenue to meet the required savings from 2015-16, without
affecting programming and services.  
  
The government is committed to repairing the federal budget and ensuring the
public broadcasters are as efficient as possible. The government has recently
reformed the procurement of and funding arrangements for transmission services
for the ABC and SBS to encourage the broadcasters to adopt more efficient
practices and realise savings that can be directed towards producing new
content and services.  
  
Similarly, the SBS advertising measures in this bill will allow SBS to earn
additional advertising revenue which could in the future be used to fund new
programming.  
  
Government funding currently comprises around 75 per cent of SBS's operational
budget. Measures in this bill will also lessen SBS's dependence on government
funding in the future.  
  
I commend the bill to the House.  
  
Debate adjourned.