Thank you Bajo and Hex [Steven “Bajo” O’Donnell and Stephanie “Hex” Bendixsen
who introduced you]  
  
And to the partners of the Stay Smart Online initiative for their longstanding
support of this important initiative, and the members of the Stay Smart Online
steering group.  
  
Stay Smart Online Week is a great collaborative project between Government,
business and online platforms. It is important to recognise that we all have a
vested stake in making sure that people’s personal information is being
protected online – and that they feel as though this is the case.  
  
A 2012 study by the Australian Bureau of Statistics found that over 1.2
million Australians – that’s 6.7% of the population aged 15 years and over –
had been a victim of personal fraud in a period of 12 months, losing
approximately $1.4 billion.  
  
Later today my colleague , Paul Fletcher, will be launching Intel Security’s
“Safeguarding The Future of Digital Australia in 2025”. Worryingly, the report
found that only a third (32 per cent) of Australians feel safe and secure in
an increasingly digital world.  
  
So clearly there is more work to do in protecting people’s online identities
and personal information. But it is also important to note that this really
starts with education and awareness – and this is what this week is really all
about. I haveoften noted that the biggest threat to online security is often
not vulnerabilities in the hardware or the software used; it is the warmware –
us – the vulnerabilities and shortcomings of the people using technology
online.  
  
The most common entry vector of malware into computer networks is from people
opening attachments from emails that appear to be genuine – always check
carefully that an attachment is from a trusted source.  
  
Around 1700 organisations are involved this year, reflecting an increasing
understanding of the implications of online safety and security and the role
we can, and must, all play in addressing the issues at hand.  
  
By government, industry and the community coming together like this we are
developing what I hope will soon become an entrenched culture of awareness
that will help protect all Australians as they increasingly move their lives
online.  
  
It is becoming increasingly anachronistic to refer to the so-called ‘digital
economy’. Rather, it is the economy, just with more tools to access
transactions than before. It’s not uncommon for people to walk into a retail
fashion store today, try on some clothes and then scan the barcode to see if
they can get a better deal somewhere else whether it is online or at another
bricks and mortar store.  
  
Stay Smart Online 2014: Focus on Mobility  
  
That’s why this year’s theme of ‘On the Go’ is so important. The internet is
all-pervasive; we’re online wherever we are now. It’s so seamless, so simple,
so everywhere it’s easy to forget that quickly transferring some funds or
posting something to Facebook on your phone or tablet is actually being
online.  
  
The take-up of smart phones and tablets has been one of the most rapid of any
technology, ever. Google research found that smartphone penetration in
Australia increased from 37 per cent to 65 per cent in the two years to 2013 .
As I recently noted while on the morning ferry into the city, it seems as
though everyone on board was swiping and scrolling on their smartphone – but
as many people pointed out, I happened to tweet this observation, meaning I
was guilty of the same crime.  
  
That little smartphone, never out of our own, or our children’s’, hand poses
the same security and safety risks as the internet at home or in the office.
Indeed, it poses even greater risk in some ways because it is always with us,
and we are often less focussed, more distracted when we are using it. It is
the same with our tablets. We are usually on the go, or multi-tasking when we
log on, which makes it easy to be forgetful or careless. Stay Smart Online is
promoting tips across seven themes this year:  
  
• Securing your mobile device • Securing your desktop or laptop computer •
Protecting your online accounts • Safely connecting and sharing • Protecting
your child • Buying online • Selling online  
  
They are all tips that need to become second nature like other basic safety
measures we take without thinking, like locking the front door or never
leaving a wallet on a café table.  
  
As a first step, we encourage Australians to subscribe to the Government's
free Stay Smart Online Alert Service, to learn about online scams, data
breaches, viruses and other issues and how to address them.  
  
The Cyber Security Challenge  
  
Obviously user behaviour can’t mitigate all the risks we face; we will also
always need cyber security professionals, just as we need security
professionals in our everyday lives.  
  
That’s what the Cyber Security Challenge Australia is all about: identifying
talented Australian students and inspiring them to become cyber security
professionals.  
  
The 2014 Challenge Australia has been a collaboration across portfolio
agencies under the Prime Minister, the Minister for Defence, the Attorney-
General and myself.  
  
These Australian Government agencies partnered with Telstra to host the Cyber
Security Challenge and were supported this year by NBN Co. and
PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC).  
  
This year’s Challenge was the largest in its three-year history, with more
than 200 students in 55 teams from 22 higher education institutions competing
in a simulated hacking game, which took place in a controlled virtual
environment over 24 hours.  
  
I want to thank Telstra for providing the competition’s infrastructure and
prizes. For the winning team, the prize includes the chance to go to the Black
Hat Conference 2014 in Las Vegas USA – the world’s premier information
security forum.  
  
I also want to thank NBN Co. for providing additional infrastructure and PwC
for its administrative support.  
  
In addition to the competition’s corporate sponsors, thank you to the
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet for organising the Challenge and
the hardworking team from the Australian Signals Directorate’s Cyber Security
Branch who built, tested and ran the technical side of the Challenge this
year.  
  
Mostly, I want to thank the extremely talented students who took part: this
nation’s future, whichever career you all eventually go on to choose, is
clearly in excellent hands.  
  
I am very happy to announce that the winning team is from the University of
NSW. Again. UNSW has now won all three Challenges.  
  
This year’s team is: John Cramb, Evgeny Martynov, Oliver Chang and Ben Faull.  
  
Second and third place also go to UNSW.  
  
In just a moment I will be joined by Kate McKenzie, from Telstra, to present
the prize.  
  
Now it is with pleasure and pride that I launch Stay Smart Online Week 2014
and welcome the Canberra Girls’ Grammar School choir to sing the Stay Smart
Online Song.  
  
Stay Smart Online is a truly collaborative initiative that helps to instil
skills and confidence that keep us all safe and lets us reap the many, many
rewards the internet has to offer while avoiding its pitfalls.