Mr TURNBULL (Wentworth—Minister for Communications) (10:45): As honourable
members will be aware tonight is the sixth night of Chanukah, an important
Jewish festival which celebrates the success of the Jewish people in
reconsecrating the temple in Jerusalem in about 165 BCE, which had been
defiled by the Hellenistic monarchy in Syria, which at that stage was ruling
Judea and that part of the world.  
  
  
  
Judas Maccabeus and his supporters rebelled, and when they finally recaptured
the temple they did not have enough sanctified oil to burn for more than one
night—and they had to keep it burning for eight nights. The miracle of
Hanukkah is that this one flask of oil burned for eight nights. It is
celebrated by the Jewish people, and honoured by all people, as an example of
Jewish courage, indomitability, resilience and of course the hope of the
Jewish people always to be a light unto the world. When you consider that the
two great monotheistic religions of the world, Christianity and Islam, are
both directly derived from Judaism, there is some considerable force in that.  
  
But in the midst of all this light there can sometimes be, and regrettably all
too often is, darkness. On 25 October in my electorate of Wentworth there was
an attack on some Jewish families who were returning home after their
traditional Shabbat dinner on Friday night. They were attacked by a group of
eight men who abused them with racial slurs and anti-Semitic language. It left
one of them, 66-year-old Eli Behar, unconscious with internal bleeding in his
head; his wife, of a similar age, was also injured. Their son Shlomo had a
finger broken and required stitches in his head. Two others were also injured
and abused in this attack.  
  
Everybody has condemned this attack, and it is important that we always do
that. Racial attacks, racism, racial abuse—whether it is against Jews or
anybody else—is utterly unacceptable in our society. So as we celebrate and
honour the festival of Hanukkah it is important to remember that, just as we
celebrate that light and that indomitable spirit of the Jewish people, we
stand up and oppose racism and racial abuse in whatever form, against
whomever, by whomever, in our society.