Mr TURNBULL (Wentworth—Minister for Communications) (15:23): If Bill Shorten
is the answer, one shudders to think what the question may be. Really, we are
being advised by the Labor Party on entrepreneurship, advised by a party that,
when it was in government, had not one member of its cabinet—not one—that had
ever been in business, no business background at all. The serried ranks of
apparatchiks—there they are before us. That is the problem with the Labor
Party. It has no understanding of business.  
  
  
  
I am thrilled that the member for Blaxland has met with Tan Le in Silicon
Valley. It is good. It is obviously a new experience for him to go there to
Silicon Valley. I have been going there for decades. I have started over a
dozen companies myself. And, by the way, so have many of my colleagues,
because one of the big differences between our side of politics and Labor's is
that we do not theorise about business, large or small; we do not believe that
government is the solution to every business problem; we know that it springs
from the enterprise and entrepreneurship of millions of Australians. The
fundamental problem with the Labor Party, Madam Speaker—and you heard it from
the member for Blaxland today—is that Labor believes in its heart, in its DNA,
that government knows what is best. We believe government's role is to enable
you to do what is best.  
  
Tan Le is a very impressive Australian entrepreneur. I have made her
acquaintance too. She is quite a star in Silicon Valley, among the many
Australian entrepreneurs there. And do you know what she raised with me, Madam
Speaker, when I was there sometime ago? She complained to me about the fact
that the Labor Party had so wrecked the employee share scheme legislation that
start-up companies in Australia could not afford to offer shares or options as
incentives to their employees. And she was not alone. The single most common
complaint I have had from entrepreneurs in the technology space, talking about
the legislative priorities that this parliament should address itself to, is
about this fundamental problem. In 2009, in a fit of madness, the Labor
government decided that any employee that was given an option or a share by
their employer, even if it was in a start-up, where the shares could be worth
a lot or—more likely, regrettably, given the success rate of small
companies—nothing, would be taxed. Even there, those shares, those bits of
paper, would be taxed and they would have to go and borrow the money to pay
the taxes. Of course, as usual, what happened? Only the very largest companies
could hire the accounting firms and the lawyers, at great expense, to
structure their way around it. And what did one small Australian start-up
after another do? It moved precisely to where the member for Blaxland was—to
Silicon Valley. So I would say to the honourable member: that is an absolute
own goal, a complete own goal.  
  
As for crowdfunding, yes, it is an important part of the mix and, yes, the
government will be presenting legislation on that later in the year. It is,
however, very important to get it right, because crowdfunding has to balance
the powerful aggregational powers of the internet—being able to get a
meaningful amount of money in lots of small bits—with consumer protection.
Getting that balance is critically important, so it is worthwhile taking care
to ensure that the legislation is drafted correctly.  
  
Let us turn now to the question of coding and STEM subjects in schools. I
think all honourable members agree that it is a very, very important part of
our curriculum, of our educational objectives, to ensure that people—young
children, in particular—have experience with coding. As a father of a
schoolteacher whose teaches coding at her school, I am aware of the keen
interest that young people have in this area. I just want to remind the
honourable member that the government is investing $3½ million—as part of $12
million in an Industry, Innovation and Competitiveness Agenda—to support the
teaching of STEM subjects. We are focused on promoting STEM subjects in
schools and increasing the amount of coding taught in schools. It is very
important, of course, that this be done with the cooperation of state
education departments. It is also very important that we see more students
completing their education with maths or science—and you heard the Minister
for Education and Training talking about the importance of that yesterday.  
  
The Leader of the Opposition's thought bubble on coding and STEM subjects is
quite interesting because, as usual, it is amazingly inconsistent. The
backflips he is capable of are truly athletic. If only he were as eloquent as
he is flexible, he would make a bigger contribution.  
  
In 2008, then Prime Minister Rudd cut the cost of students studying STEM
subjects, but this was then reversed in MYEFO 2011-12, with average student
contributions for mathematics, statistics and science almost doubling in the
cost per unit to about $8,300. They then extended this to existing students
studying STEM in the following year's budget, resulting in considerable
savings over the forward estimates. This is what the then minister, Senator
Evans, said:  
  
The reduction in student contributions for mathematics, statistics and science
units since 2009 has not been effective in substantially increasing the number
of students undertaking maths and science at university. Students are
predominantly motivated not by price but by their interests, abilities and
career preferences when selecting courses.  
  
This is a very, very important point. The best way to get more students
studying STEM, to get more people starting companies in Australia, is to
ensure that government does not throw up stupid obstacles, such as the Labor
Party's legislation on ESOPs; that government makes it easier to start
companies; that government has a strong economy that encourages resilience,
entrepreneurship and enterprise; and, above all, that government ensures that
it does its job of managing the economy as efficiently as possible.  
  
A big part of my portfolio and the honourable member's shadow portfolio is of
course the National Broadband Network. That was a project—remember this—which
was conceived in 77 days. It was started in 77 days. That was all the time
that Labor took to embark on a $43 billion project. They had no idea how much
it would cost or how long it would take to build. Indeed, just before the
election the Labor Party, so unaware of what this project would cost, were
saying it was costing only $2,200 to pass and connect premises with fibre. Now
that nearly one million premises have been passed across the whole network, we
now actually know what it costs. The real figure is $3,600, plus another $700
for the capitalised costs of the Telstra pits and pipes.  
  
So the reality is that, on this massive infrastructure project, so important
to technology and connectivity, so important to innovation, so important to
all the things the honourable member claims to be committed to, the Labor
Party was mishandling the investment in an extraordinary manner. In fact, Bill
Scales, in his independent audit of this project, said, 'This policy process
that set up the NBN, of Labor, in 77 days was rushed, chaotic and inadequate,
with only perfunctory consideration by the cabinet.' That is the level of
incompetence we have from Labor and the reason why Labor cannot be trusted
when it talks about creating jobs and fostering innovation. Labor wants us to
believe that a government composed of people with no relevant business
experience, with a shocking track record, can somehow or other provide the
spark, provide the leadership, to the entrepreneurs of Australia. That is what
it promises.  
  
Let us never forget that, in those six years, Labor spent $2 in extra spending
for every $1 they received in extra revenue. That sums up this chronicle of
incompetence and why the honourable member's claims to be in favour of
innovation fall absolutely flat.