PRIME MINISTER:  
  
Thank you. Well, there has never been a more exciting time for collaboration
between science and industry here at Bio21. You know, Vice Chancellor and John
Shine, chairman of CSL, what you are doing here and what all your scientists
are doing here is what we need to do more of. What you are doing is building
the economy of the 21st Century. This is what it’s all about. It's about
science, it's about technology, it's about innovation and one of the key
objectives of the Government's National Innovation and Science Agenda is to
encourage more collaboration between primary research, universities, research
institutes, and industry like CSL in this case.  
  
So I'm really delighted to be here when the university is committing another
$34 million to this precinct, where CSL is doubling the number of researchers
it has here. As the Dean of Science was pointing out to me on the way through
our tour of the labs, what this means is not only is more of that great
research by Australian scientists translated into the drugs and the products
that CSL is bringing out to the market, to cure disease and prevent disease,
but also it means that the students, the university are learning more.  
  
They are actually working and engaging more in a real world experience with
CSL. So this, my friends, is our future. This is how we successfully
transition from an economy that's been led by massive investment in mining
infrastructure, from a mining construction boom. This is the practical
demonstration of the next boom, the inexhaustible boom, the ideas boom because
the ideas boom is constrained only by our imagination and our commitment. I
believe both in Australia are unlimited.  
  
As long as you, the scientists of Australia, as long as you continue to push
those frontiers, as long as you keep on your search for new proteins, new
drugs, new products, and as long as we have strong Australian companies that
are prepared to take that work and commercialise it, we will continue to
create jobs and wealth and greater prosperity for us in this, the most
exciting time to be an Australian. Thank you very much Vice Chancellor, thank
you very much chairman for inviting me here. I’m thrilled to be here and
congratulations on the great work you are doing here at Bio 21 in Melbourne.  
  
Thank you.  
  
