'NBN Rebooted'  
  
CommsDay Conference Sydney, 18 November 2013  
  
I’m pleased to be here this morning to help kick off the NBN Rebooted
Conference, and I congratulate Michael Lee and John Stanton at the
Communications Alliance and Grahame Lynch at Commsday for making this event
happen. Likewise, I thank Alcatel Lucent, the major sponsor, and the rest of
the sponsors for their support.  
  
It’s tremendously encouraging that people from every corner of the
telecommunications industry have chosen to attend this event in such numbers.  
  
From the outset, the National Broadband Network has been a colossal
undertaking, well beyond the capabilities of any single firm or any government
to execute on their own.  
  
I’ve previously expressed the view that the Government should not be nearly as
involved in this project as we are.  
  
Elsewhere in the world the standard model of building new generation networks
has been for governments to provide subsidies to support deployment in less
economic, typically rural and remote, areas and for the project and business
execution risk to be carried by those best able to manage it – the private
sector.  
  
However the previous Labor Government turned all that on its head. Instead of
Government having a certain financial commitment, it was the private telcos
who received financial certainty in the form of a cheque. And all of the
execution risk of the largest, most complex, broadband deployment in the world
was assumed by the Australian Government in the form of a start up. The folly
remains breathtaking to this day and more obvious every day.  
  
We would never, ever have undertaken this project in this manner. And you only
have to look to New Zealand or indeed the UK to see much wiser and more cost
effective approaches.  
  
However we are where we are.  
  
But make no mistake; to get this project back on track and completed in a
reasonable timeframe at a reasonable cost is a daunting challenge.  
  
And it is abundantly clear to me that to achieve that goal, we are going to
need commitment and flexibility, patience and hard work from the entire
industry – not just from Telstra and Optus, not just from iiNet and Vodafone,
but from across the whole sector: service providers, carriers, vendors,
contractors, policymakers and regulators.  
  
Over the next two days you’ll have the opportunity to hear voices representing
many of these points of view.  
  
So will my colleagues and I – and let me assure you that we’ll be listening
carefully.  
  
The profoundly disappointing progress on the NBN so far holds many lessons.
But one of the most important is that Government simply doesn’t possess all
the answers, especially when it comes to executing a complex plan in a fast-
changing industry such as ours.  
  
On the contrary, the woeful performance of the NBN rollout against its
financial and operational targets so far indicates that there is a vast amount
that the Government and NBN Co have to learn. It’s my hope that this event can
make a constructive contribution to that exercise. I’ll speak in greater
detail about the current state of play at NBN Co shortly, to the extent that
I’m able to do so without pre-judging or pre-empting the findings of the
Strategic Review presently underway and due to be presented by the board of
NBN Co to the Government in early December.  
  
But first let me make a few points about the broadband policy the Coalition
took to the election on 7 September, and some of its implications for the way
the Government is going to approach the NBN.  
  
Optionality  
  
You’ve heard me say many times that our main objections to the previous
Government’s NBN were its excessive cost, the significant length of time it
would take to complete, and its shifting of a very large amount of risk from
private investors to taxpayers and the public purse. Those all remain valid
concerns.  
  
But today I want to elaborate on another of our core issues with the current
plan – the more subtle but hardly less important objection that it
unnecessarily forecloses on optionality, by setting in concrete choices that
can valuably be deferred.  
  
History tells us that policy-makers and politicians are not very good at
predicting what’s going to happen next and there is not shortage of evidence
for that in the telecommunications and technology industries.  
  
In hindsight, of course, ministers and senior public servants claim to have
seen the signs of an unexpected development even as they scramble to put
together a retrospective rationale. But the truth is that governments are all
too often blindsided, particularly when a shift is distinct from previous
experience.  
  
Nicholas Taleb describes the framework that we should ideally bring to
forecasting:  
  
“Probability is not a mere computation of odds on the dice or more complicated
variants; it is the acceptance of the lack of certainty in our knowledge and
the development of methods for dealing with our ignorance.”  
  
But that is easier said than done. And in the case of the ICT industries
generally, and the NBN specifically, the dangers are magnified. We can see
this in the rapidly changing external context for the NBN that have occurred
since April 2009, when the NBN Mark 1 was ditched and the current one-
technology-fits-93% FTTP plan proposed.  
  
At the time NBN Mark 2 was unveiled, Cisco’s first VNI index, which had been
released in the middle of 2008 predicted consumer use of Internet traffic (in
terms of volume) would grow at an annual rate of 49 per cent over the half-
decade from 2007 to 2012 [1].  
  
As it happens, that prediction turned out to be extraordinarily accurate –
consumer Internet volumes grew at a rate very close to Cisco’s estimate over
those five years.  
  
Today, in contrast, we see that the most recent VNI, which was released in
June 2013, forecasts a growth rate for total consumer use of data over the
five years from 2012 to 2017 of just 23 per cent. Rather than data volumes
doubling every two years, now they are doubling every four years.  
  
That is still very rapid growth, but not nearly as intimidating to carriers as
it was.  
  
And even more importantly, large growths in the volume of data being carried
across the Internet and indeed being consumed by households are driven
overwhelmingly by video consumption and it is self evident that data
consumption can continue to grow without a correlated growth in line speeds.  
  
Granular analyses of current and projected broadband consumption falls short
of the very high predicted line speed requirements which all too often assume
there is a linear correlation between volume growth and the demand for greater
line speed [2].  
  
Plainly, if costly and irreversible investment decisions can be deferred until
demand either materializes or can reasonably be foreseen, savings arising from
the time value of money are not the only economic value generated. There is
also very real value in keeping the option open of doing something different
than what might seem at a certain point in time to be the obvious answer – of
responding to changing technology and changing market conditions.  
  
Changing Market Conditions  
  
Likewise, in the past five years we have seen an explosion in new techniques
for wringing higher data rate broadband out of copper telephone wires. In fact
between the widespread deployment of fibre to the cabinet plus VDSL2, the
emergence of vectoring and bonding, the initial commercial trialing of fibre
to the distribution point, and emerging protocols such as g.fast, it is fair
to describe the past five years as having encompassed a revolution in the way
copper is used.  
  
Equally important changes are continuing to come at us at a rapid pace.  
  
Wireless networks are increasingly being rolled out using small cell
technologies that dramatically lower the cost of extending the reach and
throughput of this channel – but also creating the need for deep fibre
backhaul networks in urban areas.  
  
Radiofrequency spectrum is used more efficiently, greatly increasing the data
that can be sent over wireless networks. And mobility has proven to be a key
source of productivity and convenience gains from more advanced
communications, even as larger-screen higher-definition TVs (the key driver of
consumer use of bandwidth) give way for many of us to personal TV viewing on
tablets.  
  
A more nimble approach to designing (and imagining) the NBN can preserve a
great deal of this optionality.  
  
So next time you read or hear someone claim that FTTN is a ‘waste’ because the
network will just have to be upgraded to FTTP some time later pause for a
moment and consider optionality. Consider its value, and consider the vast
changes we’ve seen in so many areas since 2009.  
  
And consider what a difference they have made to the economic and
technological parameters within which the NBN will be rolled out.  
  
The previous Government didn’t get this point. It was naively willing to
forego any optionality whatsoever in its reckless pursuit of what was seen to
be a ‘pure’ technological solution that cut through three knotty problems at a
stroke – very fast broadband, improvements to regional services, and the
unwinding of Telstra’s vertical integration.  
  
The resulting plan for the NBN was portrayed to taxpayers and consumers as
commercially viable and free of risk. Heroic revenue assumptions with
unprecedented growths in ARPU marched out into the future all the way to an
equally heroic assumed sale in 2040 based on an eye-popping EBIT margin and
multiple to produce a huge terminal value. And as if this was not enough, it
was then discounted back to today’s money at a discount rate appropriate to a
mature, low risk venture [3].  
  
I see The Australian has reported one investment bank told the previous
Government that in its view the project had a negative NPV of $31 billion –
based it would seem on a more conservative view of both the amount and
riskiness of the future cashflows. Senator Penny Wong has complained that this
advice is a “selective” account of the total received by Labor in Government.
Well there is a simple solution to that. Mr Shorten, as Opposition Leader, can
authorize the release of cabinet papers of the previous Government, otherwise
inaccessible to the Coalition.  
  
He should do so.  
  
Where is the NBN up to?  
  
One result of the glacial rollout of the existing monolithic approach to the
NBN is that Australia has continued to fall in rank on most indices of
broadband quality – we are a troubling 29th in fixed broadband penetration,
according to the 2013 United Nations ‘State of Broadband Report’ [4]. Last
year we ranked 26th [5].  
  
Just as the NBN volume rollout was planned to be ramping up, we are sliding
down the league tables of international competitiveness in terms of broadband.  
  
The NBN rollout is simply not reaching enough Australian households and
businesses in a timeframe or at a cost that is sustainable. If you want to see
that, check the weekly data we now publish on the NBN Co website.  
  
Australians consumers are paying a high price for the rigidity of the previous
plan, which Minister Conroy was unwilling to admit until after the voters had
had their say.  
  
As the Strategic Review delves further into the current state of the rollout,
we are slowly getting a better handle on what NBN Co really was capable of
achieving under the outgoing management, and how we need to bolster its
capabilities.  
  
Shortly before the election, the NBN Co revised its June 30 2014 premises
passed target down to 600,000 brownfield premises, about half what had been
estimated in August the previous year.  
  
However it appears that even that estimate was unduly optimistic and it is
likely that when new, realistic and genuinely achievable targets are set they
will be materially lower – around 450,000. Compare that to Labor’s December
2010 target of 2.2 million brownfield premises passed with fibre by June 2014,
and we see NBN Co is on a path to achieve only 21 per cent of the original
forecast.  
  
NBN Reform  
  
We can’t change the past, but we’ve moved quickly since the election to make
changes at NBN Co that equip it to transition to a more predictable,
affordable and achievable rollout.  
  
Critically, we’ve advised NBN Co that the network should be rolled out cost-
effectively using the technology best matched to the circumstances of each
locality. This is fundamentally different to the Conroy model of decreeing
GPON for 93 per cent of the country.  
  
To this end, on September 24 the Government provided NBN Co with an interim
Statement of Expectations to guide construction and operational activities
while a series of reviews of the NBN project are carried out.  
  
In the transition period, NBN Co aims to avoid service disruption for
consumers; minimise the impact on the construction industry of the switch to a
mixed technology rollout by continuing FTTP deployment where building
contracts are in place and also in areas where fibre is the appropriate
technology such as business precincts and greenfield developments; and achieve
a less costly and quicker rollout plan as seamlessly as possible.  
  
On October 3 we announced the terms of reference of the strategic review and
changes to the Board and senior management, including the appointment of Dr
Ziggy Switkowski as Executive Chair of NBN Co.  
  
On November 12 we appointed three further directors – Justin Milne, Patrick
Flannigan and Simon Hackett – with many decades of combined industry
experience to the NBN Co Board. Several key changes in the executive ranks
have also been made, notably the appointments of Greg Adcock and JB Rousselot,
both experienced former Telstra executives. The search for a CEO is well
advanced as well.  
  
The above reforms are a good platform to start sorting out the mess. The next
step is the Strategic Review, which will provide a frank assessment of the
trade-offs between time to market, service levels and costs involved in
delivering high-speed broadband to all Australians. This Review must be an
exercise in truth telling. We want hand on heart true, realistic and
achievable options prudently costed and scoped on which we can make weighty
decisions. There is no longer any room at NBN Co for spin or for telling the
Minister what people imagine he wants to hear.  
  
In short I want the team, the management, the board at NBN Co to regard every
forecast, every decision as something they would be prepared to defend in a
prospectus for a public listed company. It is critical for the health of that
company that it has forecasts and goals which it can meet. I can only imagine
how debilitating it must have been over the last three years to be constantly
setting and missing and setting and missing one forecast after another.  
  
There is no pre-determined outcome. I have always said that everything is on
the table. The Government will be guided by evidence-based recommendations,
whatever they might be. That is surely the only logical position a responsible
Government could take. The Strategic Review will give NBN Co and the
Government options, and a clearer fact base upon which to base our decisions.
Of course the process of examining, investigating and revising the business
case for the NBN will not end with the Review – it should also be seen as a
stepping stone to a new Corporate plan in mid-2014.  
  
Conclusion  
  
In closing, let me remind you that up to two million households and businesses
across Australia cannot get basic fixed-line broadband at present. Addressing
these underserviced areas first is a key objective of our NBN policy.  
  
As a priority my Department, with the assistance of NBN Co and private
carriers, will provide the Government and Parliament with a ranking of
broadband quality and availability in all areas of Australia. This ranking
will be published for comment and review and guide future prioritisation of
the rollout.  
  
At long last, the NBN rollout will be directed towards the areas that need it
the most.  
  
Some renegotiation of the Telstra Definitive Agreements is required and we
look forward to concluding that before too long and in a spirit of
collaboration and partnership. Telstra after all is NBN Co’s biggest customer
and has a considerable vested interest in the project’s successful completion.  
  
None of this will be easy, however, and I expect we will suffer occasional
setbacks along the way – you can’t expect a turnaround of this magnitude to
unfold without a hitch. But I am cautiously optimistic about the NBN, for the
first time in its four and a half years of existence. We are assembling the
right team and the Strategic Review will help us frame the right plan. But
please remember what I said at the outset – building an NBN that works isn’t a
matter for Government alone. I need your help, your expertise and wisdom, your
advice, and your patience.  
  
Thank you for your time this morning.  
  
ENDS  
  
  
  
References  
  
[1] Cisco VNI – Projected Five Year Growth Rate, Bandwidth Usage:  
  
[2] See for example Robert Kenny & Tom Broughton “Domestic Demand for
Bandwidth” 5 November 2013 produced for the UK Broadband Stakeholder Group.  
  
[3] The terminal value in 2040 for NBN Co required to generate a 7.1 per cent
return on equity will be a matter examined by the Strategic Review. Most
publicly available independent estimates have suggested the required disposal
value of NBN Co to achieve the benchmark is in the order of $90 billion, or
10-12 times EBITDA – a very aggressive assumption.  
  
[4] Available online here, p.92  
  
[5] Available online here, p.84