Let me begin with the central issue. Australians live in a prosperous
developed nation with high wages and a very high standard of living.[1] We
have a generous social welfare safety net which for the most part is carefully
targeted.  
  
While we are an enterprising market economy, progressive income taxes and
means testing of virtually all working-age social payments result in much less
inequality in after-tax incomes than comparable societies such as the United
States or the United Kingdom.[2]  
  
But wages, living standards and social safety nets in developed nations around
the world are under pressure – from the need to reduce budget deficits given
high levels of debt in many countries, from emerging market competitors to
long-established industries, and from ageing workforces.  
  
Australia is no exception. So in the face of these pressures, how do we
maintain our relatively high standard of living? How can we ensure our
children and their children will have even greater opportunities and higher
incomes than we enjoy?  
  
We secure our future prosperity by embracing the future, not running from it.
By engaging with the world as it is, not as we want it to be or imagine it
once was. By making volatility and change our friend, not our foe.  
  
We secure our future prosperity by being confident and not fearful, innovative
and not complacent, and by being thoroughly Australian – disrespectful of
authority, lacking in deference, unafraid to call it how we see it if current
practice or accepted wisdom are not cutting it. I am passionately committed to
freedom of speech but if I was going to ban one phrase it would be ‘not
invented here’.  
  
We secure our future prosperity by telling the unadorned truth about the
Budget – by honestly and accurately describing our circumstances, and setting
out credible and fair options for bringing outlays and revenue back into
balance.  
  
Above all we secure our future prosperity by making sustained economic growth
our central objective and ensuring we have a coherent and credible plan for
achieving it. Responsible economic leadership demands nothing less.  
  
We must never forget, however, that economic growth or Budget repair are not
goals in themselves but simply means to end. Growth provides us with higher
living standards and greater opportunities to freely to pursue our dreams.
Budget consolidation preserves flexibility and optionality for future
generations.  
  
I’ll get back to the Budget shortly but first let’s consider the bigger
picture.  
  
Australia in the world  
  
There’s never been a more exciting time to be alive. The pace of change,
supercharged by information and communications technologies, is exhilarating.
Every day, “the old order changeth, yielding place to new”.  
  
Yes there are emerging challenges, especially for a medium-sized high-income
market economy such as Australia. But remember, we aren’t a minnow; we possess
the 12th largest economy in the world.[3] We’re creative, we’re innovative,
and increasingly we think globally.  
  
We need to be all of this and more, because times of increasing competition
and rapid change are as much times of immense opportunity for the quick-witted
as they are times of immense risk for the slow and the complacent.  
  
The big engines of change in the world today are economic convergence (catch-
up growth in emerging economies whose low skill workforces are now
increasingly high skill), global economic integration (underpinned by the
Internet, sophisticated supply chains and logistics, and specialization) and
rapid technological change. Examples of their impact abound:  
  
● The Apple iPhone 6 includes components made by 785 suppliers in 31 countries
(none of them Australian) and accounts for about 5 per cent of Japan’s exports
of electronics.[4]  
  
● The arrival of AirBNB increased the rooms available to visitors in Australia
by about 10,000 without a single brick being laid or Government approval being
granted.[5]  
  
● In calendar 2014 the number of active mobile wireless devices almost
certainly passed the number of humans (7.2 billion) on the planet.[6]  
  
Every day more jobs, industries and businesses in Australia become trade-
exposed, competing with the rest of the world in a way that was unimaginable a
few years ago. Even in non-traded sectors, technological change is the great
disruptor, from newspapers to taxis.  
  
To succeed in this environment individuals and businesses need to be smart and
nimble, productive and innovative, creative and global. They need to see
disruption as an opportunity to reach into other markets or become more
efficient within our own.  
  
The most advanced and technologically sophisticated economies tend to be very
open, highly competitive markets. Producers are specialized, compete on
differentiation, and have intimate knowledge of customer needs. There are
strong linkages between complementary sectors and between businesses and
universities, deep pools of skilled workers, executives and investors, and
geographic clusters of high-value activity.[7]  
  
These are attributes and characteristics that arise organically, through the
behaviour and initiative of firms and individuals and the free operation of
open markets, not by design. They are way beyond the remit of Government – and
should be. An economy of this sort depends upon a dynamic and entrepreneurial
culture that encourages innovation and diversity, tolerates risk and failure,
and copes easily with uncertainty and ambiguity.  
  
Governments can lead by example – for example in their own use of IT, or
innovation in service delivery. That’s why we’ve recently established the
Digital Transformation Office which will ensure that all frequently performed
transactions with Government can be undertaken digitally by 2017. Remember the
public sector is a third of our economy; every gain in productivity not only
saves taxpayer dollars but lifts the productivity of every business or citizen
interacting with it.  
  
Governments can also contribute by maximising the impact of their spending on
enablers that generate positive economic spillovers, such as education and
skills, scientific and medical research, and infrastructure with clear,
demonstrable economic or social returns.  
  
An education system that encourages excellence but also focuses heavily on
ensuring less able students receive the best possible training and skills is a
particularly crucial enabler, as it is the less skilled cohorts of the
workforce most at risk from a converging global marketplace. Until now, we
have increased Australia’s human capital by pushing a rising share of each age
group through school, college and university; as process approaches its limit,
it is by only by lifting the quality of education that we can compete.  
  
The currently proposed deregulation of universities, which provides more
flexibility and scope for specialisation, is also an important reform given
tight linkages between higher education, research and business in countries
with highly technologically sophisticated economies.  
  
But in the end the key leadership in building a more diverse, adaptable
economy must come from the companies and individuals whose success and
achievements bring it into being.  
  
The best contribution governments ultimately make is to get out of the way,
except where they enhance rather than constrain the freedom and motivation
that drive entrepreneurship and innovation. Government must help set the
table, not determine the menu or cook the meal.  
  
That is why we are repealing Labor’s misconceived laws on employee shares
which so disadvantaged start-ups. It’s why we are repealing volumes of costly
or obsolete red tape. And it is why we are working to return the Budget to
balance without tax rises that harm incentives.  
  
The Budget problem  
  
In September 2013 the Coalition Government inherited a Federal Budget that had
been heavily in deficit for six years and was projected to remain that way for
at least another decade.[8]  
  
The immediate reason for the deterioration from the Budget position left
behind by the Howard Government was not difficult to identify. If we compare
Peter Costello’s final budget in 2007-08 to Wayne Swan’s final Budget in
2013-14, we see that over Labor’s six years in office:[9]  
  
● Spending rose from $272 billion to $411 billion – an increase of $139
billion.  
  
● Revenue rose from $295 billion to $363 billion – an increase of $68 billion.  
  
So under Labor, for every $1 in new revenue, the Government committed to $2 of
new spending.  
  
Dire as the recent past appeared, the near future looked worse. Labor had
committed to several high-profile promises that if delivered would vastly
increase outlays over the next decade, with much of their cost conveniently
hidden beyond the Budget’s four-year forward estimates window.  
  
Kevin Rudd’s 2010 deal with the states to fund hospitals, Julia Gillard’s 2013
‘Gonski’ reforms to schools funding, and the National Disabilities Insurance
Scheme (NDIS) are the iconic examples.  
  
According to the Parliamentary Budget Office, these three types of spending
will have a joint annual cost of $73 billion by 2023-24 (equal to 14 per cent
of total Budget outlays).[10]  
  
However well intentioned the policy goals – and the case for the NDIS, to take
one example, is surely compelling – these heroic commitments were made just as
a flood tide of revenue from the resources boom was ebbing away. Now those
promises stand out, like ships stuck on the mud, mocking the previous
Government’s naivete for making them and our credulity for believing there was
enough revenue to pay for it all.  
  
But it wasn’t just new programmes. Spending on existing social payments was
also projected to surge, in many cases reflecting wider eligibility, more
generous rates or the inclusion of new services. Consider these forecasts from
the Parliamentary Budget Office:[11]  
  
● In 2003-04, at the start of the resources boom, the age pension cost $18
billion. Last year we spent $39 billion. A decade from now the cost of the age
pension will be $64 billion. Yes, there are more elderly Australians – but
that is still a huge increase.  
  
● In 2003-04, the Government spent $1.5 billion on childcare and parental
leave. Last year we spent $7 billion. A decade from now, we will spend $18
billion. That twelve-fold increase is despite modest growth in the cohort of
children with working parents.  
  
● In 2003-04, the Government spent $8 billion on Medicare. Last year we spent
$19 billion. A decade from now, we will spend $34 billion.  
  
How did spending rise so quickly, with even larger increases in prospect? Why
did Labor commit to costly new programs plainly beyond the capacity of the
Budget to support without large tax increases?  
  
How is it the International Monetary Fund, echoing our own Treasury, judges we
currently have a structural Budget deficit – that is, a deficit after
adjusting to remove the effects of the economic cycle – of $48 billion or 3
per cent of GDP despite our having avoided recession during the GFC and
enjoying our most sustained period of favourable terms of trade in history?  
  
Essentially, because from 2003-04 to 2013-14 the Budget received an
unprecedented windfall of roughly $460 billion, mostly on the revenue side,
during the initial phase of the resources boom.[12] Spending and tax cut
commitments rose rapidly, at first in line with the windfall, and and then
under Labor in excess of it.  
  
Treasurer Wayne Swan, speaking a language just steps away from the angry class
warfare of a century earlier, condemned ‘greedy billionaires’ and extolled the
merits of new spending initiatives to ‘spread the benefits of the boom’
(forgetting the exchange rate had already done this). A complacent optimism
had washed over us like a comforting warm bath.  
  
Unlike all previous booms this boom was going to persist.[13] The Budget mused
about prosperity underwritten by resources for ‘an extended period of
time’.[14] This time would be different.  
  
Except that it wasn’t.  
  
The nearly half-trillion dollar Budget windfall from the decade-long commodity
price rally proved temporary, like all such windfalls, and ended emphatically
with dramatic slumps in coal prices in 2013 and iron ore prices in 2014. But
as Chris Richardson at Deloitte Access Economics points out, the commitments
governments made during this period to income tax cuts or increased
expenditure, all premised on revenues no longer being collected, are
permanent.  
  
Or as the Secretary to the Treasury, John Fraser, said recently, echoing his
predecessor:  
  
The reality is that Australia has spent its way to a structural budget
problem. Government payments are growing faster than government revenues and
without action, this trend will continue.[15]  
  
So we’ve been living beyond our means, and since 2008-09 we’ve been borrowing
to fund the shortfall. Far from tightening our belts, however, under Labor we
made grand plans to live even further beyond our means in the near future.  
  
The inevitable result is debt. When the Howard Government lost office the
Federal Government had $45 billion of cash at the bank (equal to 4 per cent of
GDP). Seven years later, we are in net debt to the tune of $245 billion (or 14
per cent of GDP).[16]  
  
If we allow this situation to continue we will put the security of every
family and every business at risk. The deficits continue, our debt and
interest payments balloon - and all this at historically low interest rates.
What happens when rates rise again, as they assuredly will?  
  
When the global financial crisis struck in 2008 the fact that we had no net
Government debt gave Labor virtually unlimited flexibility to respond with
stimulus spending. How will we be placed if there is another GFC-like episode
but we have accumulated a mountain of public debt?  
  
Labor’s position is that our debt is low compared to other advanced economies.
What isn’t stated is that high debt levels are one reason those economies
suffered during the GFC and have experienced so anaemic a recovery since. Nor
does it recognise that Australia is not like Europe or the US – we are a small
economy dependent upon imported capital and exposed to massive external
shocks.  
  
Demographic change heightens these risks, as Treasury’s latest
Intergenerational Report makes clear. We know that as our population ages
there will be fewer and fewer workers to support a swelling number of
retirees. Today there are 4.5 Australians aged 15 to 64 for each person aged
65 and over. In 2035 that ratio will be 3.2, and by 2055 it will be just
2.7.[17] And it was 7.1 in 1970.  
  
We know claims on pensions, aged care and health services are going to grow.
We could and should prepare by living within our means today. But instead we
are doing the opposite, passing onto our children not just the expense of
supporting an army of retired baby boomers but also the cost of servicing the
debt we ran up because we ignored the financial realities of our times.  
  
Treasurer Joe Hockey’s 2014-15 Budget attempted to address these trends.
Evidently by doing so it disappointed many in the community.  
  
A number of its most important measures, which would have generated savings
over the forward estimates of more than $25 billion, have been unable to
secure support from the Senate cross benches and have been abandoned or
modified.  
  
It is in no way correct to say that the 2014-15 Budget was a failure. Many
measures, amounting to a net saving over the forward estimates of $16 billion,
have been passed. But we clearly haven’t been able to achieve the degree of
fiscal repair and reform that was and is needed.  
  
Why have the Budget measures been such a battle? At a mechanical, political
level the answer is that Labor, the Greens and others in the Senate refuse to
support them. That is their right.  
  
But it is to Labor’s enduring shame that as custodians of the Budget during a
period when almost three quarters of the resources boom revenue windfall
flooded in, they turned a starting point of $45 billion of cash into $245
billion in net debt by the time they left office. In opposition, they then
proceeded to block $25 billion of savings (including $5 billion they
themselves originally proposed) while cynically and irresponsibly declining to
offer a single alternative measure until the past week when they unveiled,
perhaps predictably, a plan for higher taxes.  
  
In the past fortnight, for the first time since the 2013 election, shadow
treasurer Chris Bowen and assistant shadow treasurer Andrew Leigh have at
least acknowledged there is a Budget deficit problem and promised an
alternative plan. We will see if they deliver. The acid test will be whether
Labor proposes a constructive alternative in the Budget-in-reply.  
  
I hope they do. We need an evidence-based, spin-free, fair dinkum debate about
the Budget position and what we should do to fix it. This May the spotlight
will be on Bill Shorten and Chris Bowen as much as it is on Tony Abbott and
Joe Hockey.  
  
The more fundamental problem the 2014-15 Budget faced was that the public was
not persuaded tough measures were necessary in the first place.  
  
We – and I include myself and every member of the Government in this criticism
– did not do a good enough job in explaining the scale of the fiscal problem
the nation faces, and the urgency of taking corrective action.  
  
In addition there was a deeply felt sense in much of the community that our
proposed Budget measures were unfair to people on lower incomes when taken as
a whole.  
  
In my view the failure to effectively make the case for Budget repair was our
biggest misstep, because it was a threshold we never crossed.  
  
Once you’ve explained an issue often enough that people understand there is a
genuine problem and “something” must be done, you can have an intelligent
discussion about what that something might be - and just as importantly, your
opponents will face public pressure to come up with their own “something” if
they are not prepared to support yours.  
  
But at least we have learned our lesson. The Intergenerational Report released
last week by Joe Hockey provides a solid platform from which to reboot the
Budget debate, and educate the public about the need for action.  
  
Economic management is how governments are judged  
  
It is important for the Coalition to make progress on the Budget and economic
reform. In Australia, governments delivering good economic and fiscal outcomes
are very rarely ejected. John Howard’s defeat in November 2007 (at the hands
of a self-professed fellow economic conservative who turned out to be anything
but) is a striking exception.  
  
Governments judged to be inept economic managers or presiding over recessions
(even recessions caused by global events) on the other hand seldom survive the
next election.[18]  
  
At the heart of this issue is confidence. It is critical that the public have
confidence economic management is in safe and competent hands. That means
policies need to be carefully thought through, painstakingly explained and be
robust enough to withstand rigorous policy debate.  
  
As I have said many times, the time for spin and slogans is over. The
Australian people want all of us in public life to respect them, by laying out
the challenges we face clearly and accurately, not insulting them with
exaggeration or oversimplification. They expect us to debate the options for
dealing with problems honestly, transparently and with open minds.  
  
This type of debate is a crucial element in allowing reform to be successfully
achieved without exorbitant costs from compensating losers. It’s how it
generally was achieved in the so-called reform era between 1983 and 2007.  
  
While the sequence varies from issue to issue, the case for a difficult reform
typically involves:  
  
● Highlighting a problem and clearly and repeatedly explaining the need for
reform.  
  
● Calculating the costs of inaction.  
  
● Setting out the various options for change.  
  
● Discussing their respective merits and disadvantages.  
  
● Choosing the best option and devising a plan to implement it.  
  
● Identifying losers from change and to the extent possible assisting them to
adjust.  
  
Two examples of reform: the NBN and Australia Post  
  
Let me briefly describe two instances of how I’ve followed this approach in my
own portfolio, starting with the National Broadband Network.  
  
With the NBN the first thing we threw out was ideology, lies and spin. We told
the truth about the project - with an independent Strategic Review completed
three months after the September 2013 election, by publishing weekly rollout
statistics, through requiring the company to provide detailed quarterly
financial and operational reports. In short we made NBN Co as open and
accountable as a publicly listed company.  
  
Only a few weeks ago the company published the true costs per premises of the
NBN fibre to the premises rollout to date. These costs were not $2200 - $2500
as was claimed by the former Labor Government in April 2013, but $3600. When
you take into account the capitalised costs of leasing ducts and pits (as one
should) the total rose to $4300. The increase from 2013 wasn’t a trifling
misunderstanding. Extra costs of that order add up to real money for a project
serving roughly 10 million premises.  
  
At the outset we explained our approach on the NBN was going to be pragmatic,
focussed on delivering households the broadband they want and were willing to
pay for. Rather than engaging in theological debates about fibre versus copper
versus other technologies, we would free the company to use whichever access
technology enabled it to finish the job as quickly and cheaply as possible.
Most end users accept this approach - and are happy to forgo Labor’s fibre
nirvana in favour of high speed broadband deployed sooner and costing less.  
  
Let me turn to Australia Post. Its letters business has lost $1.5 billion
since 2008. The decline reflects high fixed costs and fewer and fewer letters
being sent. Losses on letters have overwhelmed profits on parcels. If nothing
is done the business will need about $6.6 billion of subsidies from the Budget
over the next decade.[19]  
  
Regrettably, prior to September 2013 Australia Post’s problems had been
quietly kicked into the long grass. Upon becoming Minister I asked Post’s CEO
and Chairman to lay out the truth about its letters business in public, loudly
and repeatedly and they did so. We retained an independent firm, BCG, to
verify the scale of its problems. We engaged with employees, their unions,
franchisees and customers both large and small.  
  
So last week when we announced radical changes (stamp prices to rise to $1.00
and delivery times to slow down by two days) there was broad acceptance,
despite the pain involved.  
  
The problem had been explained and, it seems, understood. The concerns of
stakeholders (employees, Licensed Post Offices and consumers, especially in
the bush) were considered and addressed. Our reform proposal had been flagged
for months, nobody had come up with a better mousetrap, and so with regrets
all around just about everyone involved accepted that the alternatives were
even more painful, while this way, Australia Post does have a viable future.  
  
With the right groundwork, reform is still possible.  
  
This is as true for the Budget as anything else.