The National Broadband Network is the nation's largest and most costly
infrastructure project.  
  
Regrettably, it is also the most misunderstood and misrepresented. That is
because for the four years of its life under Labor, the NBN has been shrouded
in a web of spin, obfuscation and exaggeration.  
  
Forecasts have been set, missed, set again, missed again, set a third time,
and missed a third time.  
  
Beguiling promises have been offered but not delivered.  
  
This is not a question of fibre versus copper. The key issue is only how far
fibre optics are pushed out into the network and whether they must reach into
every home and every business or, whether existing copper infrastructure can
be used for the last few hundred metres and in so doing save much time,
inconvenience and many billions of dollars.  
  
The NBN project needs, more than anything, an end to spin.  
  
After I became Minister for Communications, I wrote to the employees of NBN
Co, telling them this Government expects to receive the unvarnished truth, not
what they think we want to hear.  
  
Forecasts, business plans and practices need to be informed by sober reality.
NBN Co's people must be free to express their views and perform their work
without worrying whether they are contradicting a Minister's press release.  
  
1\. Background to the Strategic Review  
  
On October 3 the Government asked NBN Co to undertake a Strategic Review of
this vitally important project. In a nutshell we posed three questions:  
  
Where is the project now?  
  
How much will it cost and how long will it take to complete under Labor's
specifications?  
  
And what are our options for completing it sooner and at less cost?  
  
NBN Co delivered a draft report on December 2 and its final report today. We
are releasing the final document presented by NBN Co in full, subject only to
certain redactions sought by the Company to protect its interests in current
and prospective legal and commercial agreements.  
  
The Strategic Review confirms what many Australians suspected, but both of my
predecessors as Communications Minister shamefully concealed from the public.  
  
The rollout is two years behind after three years and won't finish until the
mid-2020s.  
  
Costs are so high that they will add $43 per month to a typical household's
broadband bill.  
  
And NBN Co faces a daunting internal transformation under its new leadership.  
  
Critically, this report is not reverse engineered to justify or rationalise
government policy – whether set out in a speech, conjured up by press release
or sketched on the back of a drink coaster.  
  
I emphasise this point because the facts so methodically presented in the
Review make it plain that the NBN is in a worse state than Australians have
been told.  
  
We were told the case for a fibre-to-the-premises NBN was so potent there was
no need for cost-benefit analysis.  
  
We were assured this costly project could be built without any increase in
broadband charges.  
  
And we were repeatedly told the rollout was on schedule and within budget.  
  
Even just prior to the September 7 election, long after it was clear to most
observers that the rollout was missing every goal, the Member for Grayndler
continued to assert 5.5 million households and businesses would get the NBN by
2016.  
  
The former Minister knew that was untrue as demonstrated by the draft 2013 NBN
Co Corporate Plan he had received, and accorded to a leaked minute published
in The Australian presented to Cabinet in July.  
  
Madam Speaker, turning this project around is a formidable challenge, but we
are determined to complete the project as quickly as we can, at the lowest
possible cost to taxpayers, and affordably for consumers.  
  
And we are equally determined that in the rollout of the NBN, the many
Australians without adequate fixed line broadband today, particularly in
regional areas, receive top priority.  
  
2\. Progress & Prospects of the Current Rollout  
  
I will start by outlining the Strategic Review's findings regarding the
previous Government's NBN policy. Because the situation at NBN Co is far worse
than Parliament and the public were led to believe, worse even than the most
trenchant critics of the NBN imagined.  
  
Rollout Schedule  
  
Construction of the network has fallen further and further behind schedule. At
the end of September the Labor NBN's fibre, satellite and wireless networks
were available at 384,000 homes and businesses.  
  
That's barely 3 per cent of the 13 million premises NBN Co must reach to
finish the job.  
  
It's only 45 per cent of the forecast for September in NBN Co's latest
Corporate Plan.  
  
And it's over a million premises behind Julia Gillard's rollout announcement
in December 2010.  
  
Because of construction delays, the Strategic Review estimates Labor's NBN
will not be completed until 2024. That's three and a half years later than
stated in the Corporate Plan, six years later than claimed in Labor's original
FTTP plan in 2009, and eleven years later than promised by Kevin Rudd in 2007.  
  
  
  
Service Delays  
  
The brownfields rollout – which is connecting homes and businesses in
established areas – is in even worse shape. At the end of September 227,000
premises were 'passed' with fibre, which normally means the occupant can order
a service and receive it within a few days.  
  
But 74,000 were 'service class zero,' a term unique to NBN Co, which indicates
they cannot foreseeably obtain service. These are mostly businesses and multi-
dwelling premises such as apartment blocks.  
  
A further 104,000 were 'service class one,' which indicates fibre hasn't yet
been run from the street into the household or business. This can take six
months or more. So the bottom line is that the occupants of fewer than one in
four established premises 'passed' by fibre can order service and expect to
get it in a reasonable and predictable timespan.  
  
Costs & Revenues  
  
The cost of constructing the NBN to Labor's plans has also blown out. The
Strategic Review estimates completing it requires funding of $73 billion –
another $29 billion or 65 per cent beyond the cost forecast by the current
Corporate Plan.  
  
Unit costs for parts of the network are twice as much as forecast, while NBN
Co is burdened by what the Review frankly admits are excessive corporate
overheads ramped up in anticipation of a level of construction and customer
activity that never materialised.  
  
The revenue assumptions made under Labor are also extremely optimistic, and
entirely at odds with industry experience here or abroad. NBN Co and its
advisers found revenues between now and 2021 have been overstated by $13
billion compared to the midpoint of two more realistic revenue scenarios
presented – one plausibly optimistic, and one plausibly pessimistic.  
  
  
  
Retail Prices  
  
The exact impact of Labor's NBN on the price Australians pay for broadband
depends on investment returns and retail service provider margins. But if NBN
Co's goal is to earn the 7.1 per cent return promised by the previous
Government, and RSP margins remain unchanged in dollar terms, Labor's NBN will
drive up retail prices by between 50 and 80 per cent.  
  
That means a $43 per month increase in the broadband bill paid by a typical
Australian household.  
  
  
  
As I've noted previously, the most shocking aspect of the NBN is Labor's
arrogant disregard for the devastating effect of price rises driven by their
policy on the take-up of broadband among low income households.  
  
Those opposite may not care, but the Strategic Review confirms the gravity of
this problem.  
  
To summarise, Madame Speaker, the cold hard facts about Labor's NBN are
profoundly at odds with the fanciful tales and wishful thinking of those
opposite.  
  
And it is important to note that achieving even these projections of higher
costs and slower construction schedules requires a very significant
improvement in NBN Co's productivity and efficiency from current levels. In
the absence of such an improvement, outcomes will be materially worse.  
  
  
  
3\. Alternative Options for the NBN  
  
The second broad set of questions the Finance Minister and I assigned the
Strategic Review involved exploring alternatives to the existing NBN, which as
we've seen will cost billions more and take years longer to complete than was
ever admitted to the public.  
  
The Strategic Review's baseline scenario is its revised outlook for the NBN
proposed by Labor. Beyond this it considers five additional scenarios:  
  
The second is a radical redesign of the all fibre-to-the-premises NBN. This
cuts one year and $9 billion off the baseline, but at $64 billion it's no
bargain.  
  
The Review examines three intermediate scenarios, which make increasing use of
existing network infrastructure to cut costs to more reasonable levels.  
  
The sixth and final scenario is an NBN utilising a multi-technology mix, or
MTM, model. This optimises the rollout by choosing the most economically
efficient technology in each locality according to its housing stock, existing
infrastructure and user demand.  
  
The scenario recommended by NBN Co's leadership is the last: the MTM model.
But none of the scenarios can escape the irresponsible and wasteful current
and future expenses locked in on Labor's watch. The NBN Co Strategic Review
team estimates the burden of these inescapable costs at $15 billion or more.  
  
  
  
The MTM Rollout  
  
Under an MTM model 26 per cent of premises in the fixed line footprint will
receive very fast broadband over fibre to the premises. Another 44 per cent
are served with fibre-to-the-node, building or distribution point, while the
last 30 per cent are served via upgraded HFC – the cable rolled out for pay TV
in our capital cities in the late 1990s.  
  
HFC networks are capable of delivering hundreds of megabits per second today,
just like fibre, but under Labor's plan Telstra and Optus were to be paid
billions to switch them off.  
  
The MTM scenario is the least expensive modelled scenario, requiring funding
of $41 billion.  
  
  
  
This will still be the biggest and most expensive infrastructure project in
our history and the largest single national broadband project in the world.
Regrettably it will be many billions of dollars more expensive than it would
have been had the MTM approach been taken from the outset. Labor has wasted
billions which we can never recover.  
  
An MTM network can be substantially completed by 2019 – when 91 per cent of
premises in the fixed line footprint will have access to download rates of 50
megabits per second or more, and between 65 and 75 per cent will have 100
megabits per second or more – and entirely finished by 2020.  
  
  
  
Coalition Election Commitments  
  
This means the Coalition's goal of completing the NBN in the next six years –
set out in our April policy, released long before we knew the truth about the
damaged project we would inherit from Labor – can be achieved.  
  
Disappointingly that's not the case for the objective we also expressed of
delivering nationwide access to 25 megabits per second by 2016.  
  
The rollout is drastically further behind schedule than we expected in April.
NBN Co's latest estimate of the established premises it will reach with fibre
by June 2014 is only 357,000 – 772,000 fewer than claimed by Labor at the time
of the election.  
  
And NBN Co is in a far worse condition, its contractor relationships more
damaged, and its capacity to change course and assimilate new technologies
more debilitated and diminished than even we allowed for.  
  
A policy based on the Strategic Review's MTM scenario can, however, deliver
very fast broadband to twice as many premises by 2016 as were ever going to
receive it under Labor.  
  
And Madame Speaker, let me make this pledge on behalf of the Government: we
will work assiduously with NBN Co to do everything we can to surpass the
forecasts in the Strategic Review. Likewise, we remain determined to ensure
our NBN connects those Australians with the worst broadband in priority,
unlike the NBN managed by our predecessors.  
  
Broadband Quality  
  
Upgrading from download rates of 5 megabits per second to 25 or 50 megabits
per second would be welcomed by any internet user, but for those with limited
or no access to adequate fixed broadband at all, it is transformational.  
  
Shortly we will publish the first ever analysis of broadband availability in
Australia. It will confirm areas encompassing about 1.5 million premises have
little or no broadband. Many are in regional areas. All are victims of the
lack of investment in fixed line communications by private carriers over the
past six years, which is yet another damaging by-product of the gap between
Labor's rhetoric and execution on broadband.  
  
Return on Investment  
  
The Review's preferred scenario saves $32 billion compared to business as
usual under Labor. While that's the sort of number the Rudd and Gillard
Governments tossed around with abandon, it's a saving that makes a difference.
It allows the network to earn a return roughly equal to the Commonwealth bond
rate and ensures prices don't rise in real terms.  
  
This Strategic Review points the way to a new corporate plan, but it is not
yet the new corporate plan. More work is required to set the NBN on a
responsible and affordable course.  
  
An important step in the reform of the NBN, announced today, is the
appointment of a new CEO, Mr Bill Morrow, currently the chief executive of
Vodafone Australia. Mr Morrow is a very experienced telecom engineer and chief
executive who has managed and indeed constructed telecom networks in America,
Asia and Europe.  
  
4\. Cost Benefit Analysis and Review of Regulation  
  
Part of the work is a cost-benefit analysis of the economic and social returns
from broadband and a review of the long-term regulation of NBN Co which will
also inform the new Corporate Plan.  
  
The Government is today announcing an experienced and distinguished panel to
carry out that inquiry, which will report by June: it will be chaired by Dr
Michael Vertigan AC, who will be joined by Ms Alison Deans, Dr Henry Ergas and
Mr Tony Shaw.  
  
5\. Conclusion  
  
Madame Speaker,  
  
I congratulate and thank the team at NBN Co and its advisers who prepared the
Strategic Review, which is the most thorough and objective analysis of the
National Broadband Network ever provided to Australians - a highly
professional piece of work prepared in a very tight timeframe.  
  
The internal NBN Co team was led by its Head of Strategy and Transformation,
JB. Rousselot, and ably supported by Tim Ebbeck and many others. The company's
outside advisers were the Boston Consulting Group, KordaMentha,and Deloitte.
Valuable insights came from international experts including Mike Galvin from
Openreach and Mark Ratcliffe from Chorus.  
  
Finally, I want to thank the NBN Board and most of all its Executive Chairman,
Dr Ziggy Switkowski.  
  
Despite the delays and disappointments, the concept of a National Broadband
Network remains popular. Australians want universal access to high quality
broadband and so does the Government because of the misguided way the previous
Government embarked on this project, as much as $15 billion has been
unnecessarily spent to achieve this goal. And those dollars cannot be
recovered.  
  
To date the NBN has been the most wasteful infrastructure project in our
history.  
  
But we are where we are. And let me assure the House that under this
Government, we can complete this project as we promised – sooner, at less cost
to taxpayers and more affordably for consumers. Our first step in that mission
is to end the spin and the wishful thinking, and embrace reality.  
  
I table the Strategic Review of the National Broadband Network and commend it
to the House. It will be available from today on the website of the NBN Co.