It is the responsibility of any incoming Government to look carefully at the
range of activities that taxpayers fund, and ask the tough questions. Is an
expenditure serving the public interest? Does it represent good value for
taxpayers? Can the objective be achieved more cost-effectively, or a better
outcome be delivered at the same cost?  
  
In every portfolio, across every spending program, we've had to look closely
at what we do and how we do it. In my own portfolio that includes our national
broadcasters—the ABC and SBS, which receive $1.4 billion every year from the
Government.  
  
After working closely with the broadcasters for the last 8 or 9 months it is
clear that there is a great opportunity for them to modernise their businesses
without reducing the resources they have available for programming; in other
words without reducing the quantity or quality of what Australians view and
listen to on ABC or SBS.  
  
This is what productivity is all about - getting the same, or ideally, a
bigger bang for a smaller buck.  
  
Running the ABC, or indeed SBS, is not easy. The ABC, for example, is required
by its charter to provide a balance between programmes of wide appeal and
specialised programs. This is the conundrum. If the ABC simply goes for
ratings and emulates the approach of the commercials, people will ask why we
need it at all; if its programming is too arcane - Sophocles in the original
Greek perhaps - people will ask why we are wasting taxpayers' dollars on
elitist entertainment.  
  
The commercial broadcaster's revenues are a function of its ratings - simple.
The ABC's are a function of its ability to persuade the Government of the day
to give it money. The commercial broadcaster's core KPI, like any private
sector firm, is its profitability. The ABC's KPIs - set out in its charter,
are much more subjective than a line in an income statement.  
  
All of this makes it much harder to run a public broadcaster. There simply
isn't the same relentless, daily pressure to innovate, to cut costs, to lift
productivity that there is in the private sector. Now despite that I must
acknowledge that there has been real innovation at both of the public
broadcasters - especially in digital media which, as you know, is within the
charter of both the ABC and SBS.  
  
Equally, I should acknowledge that the SBS has always been a leader in doing
more with less - in no small part because it has never had much money to play
around with. When we restructured the bankrupt TEN network more than twenty
years ago, we learned a great deal from SBS' lean operating model and it is
still in many respects a good example today.  
  
Finding efficiencies and delivering new services are not mutually exclusive
pursuits. With the right reforms and leadership the ABC and the SBS will
emerge from this process much stronger organisations, capable of generating
even better value from the money Australians invest in their operation.  
  
As you know, the Abbott Government inherited a growing mountain of debt and,
despite numerous promises to the contrary from Wayne Swan, a budget deeply in
deficit and, without big policy changes, certain to remain in deficit.  
  
The melancholy consequence of spending more than you receive in income is more
and more debt and the fundamental inescapable fact is this: if we let things
go on as they were, we were on track to record deficits forever, and pile up a
mountain of debt – six hundred billion dollars or more.  
  
So we had to raise more revenue and/or cut spending. None of that is popular.  
  
Labor and the Greens dispute the need for the Government to take any action.
Bill Shorten has offered no alternative plan. Unless you've got an alternative
plan to repair the Budget, what you're really saying is: "Don't worry – keep
spending, keep borrowing, hope for the best and let our kids and grandkids
sort it out."  
  
So we have made savings across the board and that includes the ABC and SBS. Is
it seriously argued that the public broadcasters should be exempt from the
spending cuts that apply to almost all other government departments and
services?  
  
Some have pointed to a statement made by Tony Abbott on the eve of the
election that there would be "no cuts to the ABC or SBS."  
  
These remarks need to be understood in context. Prior to the election many
people (including competing media groups) urged the Coalition to take an axe
to the ABC in order to curtail their on-air and online activities.  
  
Both Joe Hockey and I made it quite clear we had no plans to make cuts of that
nature at the public broadcasters – but if there were to be savings made
across the board, the ABC and SBS could not expect to be exempt from the
obligation to contribute by eliminating waste and inefficiencies.  
  
Unless you believe that Mr Abbott was, in that one line, intending to
contradict and over rule the very careful statements of intention made by Mr
Hockey and myself, his remarks can only be understood in the same context,
which left open savings of a kind which would not diminish the effective
resources the ABC and SBS had available to produce content.  
  
At the national broadcasters, I saw an important first step was reforming the
procurement of (and funding arrangements for) transmission services for the
ABC and SBS.  
  
Currently ABC and SBS receive tied funding earmarked exclusively for
transmission costs. Much of this funding is provided on a 'no-win, no-lose'
basis – the Government funds the actual costs of these services each year,
with any unspent funding returned to the Budget.  
  
This arrangement removes any incentive for the broadcasters to aggressively
negotiate for lower prices for services, other than of course the patriotic
interest shared by all Australians have in ensuring the Commonwealth's
resources are prudently spent.  
  
A review of transmission found that there are material savings available from
changing the way the Government funds the broadcasters' transmission costs.  
  
As of this year's MYEFO transmission funding will be rolled into the ABC and
SBS's broader operational funding, encouraging the broadcasters to manage
their transmission costs within their total budget allocation and adopt more
efficient practices. So if less is spent on transmission, more can be spent on
something else, including distribution over the Internet, if not required to
fund the savings I will outline in more detail in a moment.  
  
I asked the Department of Communications to undertake an Efficiency Study to
identify savings that could be made by improving efficiencies in the back of
house departments of the ABC, in other words savings that could be made
without reducing the resources available for programming.  
  
This was a very deliberate move on my part. The easiest way to cut costs in a
television network is simply to cancel programmes - and replace them with
cheaper ones. More difficult is to go through the way the business operates,
line by line and ask can we do this more efficiently, with fewer people, with
fewer fixed assets or other expensive resources.  
  
A commercial broadcaster is always going to look for savings that do not
impact on programming quality - because that is the key to its ratings and
hence to its revenues. A public broadcaster, which like the ABC does not carry
advertising, is not so clearly constrained.  
  
In other words, it was obvious the ABC and SBS were going to have to
contribute to the overall Budget repair strategy, but I wanted to make sure
those savings would be made in the most intelligent and business like fashion.  
  
The Department was assisted by Mr Peter Lewis, for many years the Chief
Financial Officer of the Seven Network, as well as senior executives from both
broadcasters.  
  
The study was provided to the ABC and SBS in April to assist their boards and
management in identifying areas they may not have previously explored in their
efforts to improve efficiency. It highlighted outdated business and
administrative practices where they could pursue savings without affecting
programming or services.  
  
Given the findings of the Efficiency Study, we announced a 1 per cent
reduction in funding to the ABC and SBS in the 2014-15 Budget. This
contributed savings over four years of $38.3 million for the ABC and $8.5
million for SBS.  
  
This was not an ongoing efficiency dividend, but as I stated at the time, a
down-payment on larger savings to be made following consultation with the
broadcasters on how they could best implement the findings of the Efficiency
Study and progress their own savings initiatives.  
  
I record again the Government's thanks to Mr Lewis, the team from my
Department and of course the management of ABC and SBS in preparing that
efficiency study.  
  
In its 146 pages the Lewis Efficiency Study discusses 48 operational
activities across the ABC and the SBS. It identifies five key areas where
significant efficiencies and savings can be achieved:  
  
What about Programme Cuts and Changes?  
  
Ever since the prospect of these savings has been raised the ABC, or people
claiming to speak for the ABC, has suggested that this or that programme will
be a casualty.  
  
At one point even the beloved Peppa Pig was said to be facing the axe! And
then when that strained credulity, Tony Jones and Lateline were substituted
for the pig only to be followed by the Stateline versions of 730 on Friday
evenings.  
  
Let me be quite clear. The savings announced today are not of a scale that
requires any particular change to programming. All of the savings can be found
within operational efficiencies of the kind canvassed in the Lewis Efficiency
Study.  
  
Now while money is one scarce resource a linear television broadcaster has to
manage, another scarce resource is time in the schedule. And broadcasters will
make changes to programmes all the time.  
  
The ABC, I know, is particularly concerned that the median age for its
television audience is 61. I find this reassuring. It means I am still one of
ABC TV's younger viewers.  
  
The ABC will change programmes because it thinks something else will rate
better, or it might think that the money spent on programme A can better spent
on programme B. Or it might think that money spent on television can be better
spent on online. This is the normal business of a media company. The
alternative (which some might like I grant you) is that nothing ever changes -
a recipe for eventual irrelevance.  
  
There is a temptation for management to blame the Government for some of these
programme changes. That would be cowardly.  
  
The ABC management know that they can meet these savings without reducing the
resources available to programming - furthermore they know that the Government
and their Board know too.  
  
The ABC has the most extensive broadcasting network in rural and regional
Australia—this is one of the ABC's greatest strengths. The efficiency study
noted that in the absence of commercial providers, the ABCs Local Radio
service, particularly in regional and rural Australia, is relied upon for
local news and the essential emergency broadcaster function.  
  
The study notes this requires a physical presence at the local level, with its
associated staff, operating and capital expenses. While the Study also
suggests that the ABC should review the size and location of radio stations so
that they match changing population sizes, it did not recommend any changes to
the level of radio coverage in rural and regional areas.  
  
There is nothing more clearly within the letter and spirit of the ABC's
charter than its local radio services in regional and rural Australia. With
the enormous flexibility offered by the Internet and digital technologies
coupled with the enthusiasm for story telling of their local news teams,
without further expense we should see more local news with pictures on the air
and on the net.  
  
In total, including the 1 per cent down payment announced in the May Budget,
the full savings the broadcasters will return to the Budget amounts to $308
million over 5 years.  
  
For the ABC this means it will receive $5.2 billion over 5 years rather than
$5.5 billion, a saving of $254 million or 4.6%. The ABC expects that it will
have implementation costs over this period of $41 million in order to achieve
the savings.  
  
For the SBS this means its operating budget will be reduced by $25.2 million
over the 5 year period or 1.7%. A legislative change to allow SBS to generate
further revenue by changes to its advertising arrangements brings SBS's total
savings returned to the budget to $53.7 million or 3.7% . As you will deduce
we are, after extensive discussions with SBS, assuming that the additional
revenue to the SBS from the advertising changes amounts to $28.5 million over
five years.  
  
To put this in context, the funding proposal will reduce aggregate Government
funding to both national broadcasters over the five years from 2014-15 to
2019-20 from $6.9 billion to $6.6 billion. A total reduction in Commonwealth
expenditure of 4.4%  
  
The Government provides the ABC and SBS with the majority of their funding but
it has no power to direct the broadcasters in relation to operational matters.
Decisions regarding which efficiencies will be implemented, and when, are
matters for the ABC and SBS Boards.  
  
SBS currently has a strict limit of five minutes of ads per hour. In line with
a recommendation from the Efficiency Study, the Government intends to
introduce legislation into the Parliament to allow for a more flexible
approach allowing the network to average the five minutes per hour across the
day, but run no more than 10 minutes in any given hour.  
  
This means the the existing daily limit of 120 minutes will be maintained –
which is well below the 350 minutes per day commercial broadcasters can devote
to advertising.  
  
Take the fact that, the two highest television revenue results for SBS since
it started to carry advertising in 2003 were $72.3 million in 2009-10 and
$73.4 million in 2013-14 and those were in small part due to the FIFA World
Cup.  
  
Compare this to the 2013-14 advertising revenue earned by commercial
broadcasters of $3.9 Billion: we are talking about less than 2 per cent of
that commercial television advertising pie.  
  
SBS maintain that from this change they will receive $8-9 million per annum of
additional revenue. Their costing model is robust, although there are some who
dispute it.  
  
The efficiency review thought the most optimistic level of earning would be
$20 million per annum. Whichever way you look at it, the additional revenue
SBS could collect from this change is not material compared to the revenues of
the commercial broadcasters.  
  
As I said this change will require legislation, like other media reforms the
Government is considering. The Government intends to put this amendment to
Parliament in Q1 next year.  
  
The focus of the Efficiency Study and the work I've undertaken with both
broadcasters is about more than repairing the Budget, it is also about reform
that will modernise both organisations, pave the way for productivity gains
and ensure our national broadcasters are focused on good business practices
for the long term. In this vein I've looked at the budgeting and decision-
making structures of the broadcasters and at mechanisms to improve
transparency of their operations.  
  
The ABC and SBS are independent corporations created under their respective
charter Acts and under the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability
Act.  
  
As the Minister I'm accountable to Parliament for the performance of agencies
within my Portfolio. Performance relates to many aspects of their operations
that are distinct from programming decisions.  
  
An interesting insight from the Efficiency Study was that the ABC and SBS
Boards would benefit from a clearer understanding of the Government's Budget
priorities, and the outcomes the government is seeking from its annual
investment of taxpayers' money. This needs to be carefully balanced against
the statutory independence of both organisations.  
  
Parliament included provisions in the broadcasters' establishing legislation
that provides the government of the day with the right to offer formal advice
on operational and financial matters to each of the Boards - section 8 of the
ABC Act and section 11 of the SBS Act.  
  
This advice must be considered by the Boards but can, of course be ignored.
Importantly it would be a very transparent way of providing advice to the
broadcasters on matters that do not affect their independence.  
  
Let me set out some of the matters I intend to raise with the ABC.  
  
For reasons I frankly do not understand, the ABC does not have an independent
Chief Financial Officer. That role is undertaken by Mr David Pendleton the
Chief Operating Officer who, in that role, is responsible for most of the
resources and cost base of the ABC.  
  
A company like the ABC should have a qualified CFO who reports directly to the
Board as well as the CEO and is fearlessly independent, ensuring that the
management and board understand precisely where and how funds are being spent
and what everything costs.  
  
Equally I propose to recommend to the Board that the position of Editor in
Chief no longer be combined with that of Managing Director. It creates the
impression that the Managing Director is directly in charge of ABC News and
Current Affairs which he is not, and given the wide range of his
responsibilities, could not be.  
  
The Board should expect the head of news and current affairs, like the CFO, to
report directly to the Board as well as to the managing director thus enabling
the Board to discharge its statutory obligation referred to below.  
  
Another matter is providing more granular detail on where the ABC, and SBS,
spend their money and how it relates to their charter obligations.  
  
In my view the ABC and SBS should so far as possible seek to be as transparent
as a public listed company. The best cure for suspicion is sunlight.  
  
Other matters I propose to include are to co-operate closely (between
broadcasters) to maximize the efficiency of public broadcasting in Australia
(as identified in the SBS Act) and to set out each year the steps the Board
has taken to meet its statutory obligations including that in section 8(1)(c)
of the ABC Act " to ensure that the gathering and presentation by the
Corporation of news and information is accurate and impartial according to the
recognised standards of objective journalism."  
  
This last point is a very important one, and I acknowledge Mr Spigelman's
recent reviews of the ABC's news coverage of certain issues.  
  
But it is widely thought (including by many people who either write to me or
write about me) that the Minister is responsible for ensuring that the ABC's
news and current affairs is accurate and impartial.  
  
The Government does not and should never have any control over the news and
current affairs of the ABC or SBS. Mr Putin's model of media management is no
more admirable than his foreign policy.  
  
But their boards are responsible for their objectivity and accuracy. I have on
occasions heard directors say "they do not want to get involved" Well if they
do not want to get involved they should resign. The Board of each broadcaster
has that responsibility and must discharge it, and be seen diligently to
discharge it.  
  
We all expect a lot from our national broadcasters. We have every right to –
projected expenditure of $6.6 billion over the next five years, after the
proposed savings I've outlined today, represents a significant commitment by
taxpayers to these two organisations by any reasonable measure.  
  
It is the Australian people who will judge whether or not they are getting
value for money. It is the millions of citizens who tune in to ABC or SBS each
week who will decide whether the Government should continue to invest billions
of dollars in these two great national institutions on their behalf.  
  
To their credit the ABC and SBS are well loved and well trusted – certainly
much more so than any political party, minister or furious columnist. And as
I've noted before, the role of the public broadcasters in our national life
today is more important than ever, as the business model of the newspapers in
particular is under threat and newsrooms dwindle.  
  
With this growing importance comes pressure for both ABC and SBS to uphold
even higher standards of balance and integrity in their coverage - and, as
I've discussed today, to demonstrate even greater professionalism,
transparency and efficiency in their handling of scarce public resources.  
  
If the management of the ABC think they cannot find a 5% saving through
efficiencies, they are selling themselves short and letting down the people of
whose resources and trust they are the custodians.