Good morning. It is a pleasure to be here.  
  
Thank you to both Jason Yetton and Phil Coffey for your introduction and for
inviting me here to speak this morning.  
  
Introduction  
  
At the risk of sounding cynical, it is easy when reflecting on the changes to
Australia’s education policy over the last decade to be reminded of Prince
Tancredi's observation in The Leopard, Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusa’s great
novel on 19th Century Sicilian life: ‘if we want things to stay the same,
everything must change’.  
  
Too frequently education policy makers have sought to reinvent curricula by
adding more and more courses and giving existing courses increasingly exotic
names. But what has this actually achieved? A level of confusion, certainly.
For instance, what does ‘digital technologies’ actually mean and what is the
difference between design and digital technologies when it comes to the
Australian curriculum?  
  
As Phil Callil recently pointed out in his review of the technologies
curriculum, the term digital technologies is not well known in the education
systems of Canada, Finland, Singapore or the UK - not to mention the IT
industry itself.  
  
A second, and perhaps more important question to ask is, have educational
outcomes actually improved? If we turn to international performance tables
such as PISA (Programme for International Student Assessment) and TIMMS
(Trends in International Mathematics and Science) it is clear that we need to
improve educational outcomes across both the ICT and broader STEM disciplines.  
  
To remain competitive in an increasingly interconnected world we need to
ensure that the curriculum equips students for the jobs of tomorrow. We need
to consider where future employment demand will come from and the skills
school leavers will need to compete in a world that has been transformed by
the Internet - where nearly every industry is now trade exposed.  
  
This increased competition presents both greater challenges and greater
opportunities. Many new jobs will be created, many will be destroyed. The key
for us as a nation, and for each of us as individuals and especially as
parents, is to ensure that here in Australia we are, in net terms, creating
new jobs and new businesses and new opportunities.  
  
If we do not, if we do not become more competitive, then we cannot remain the
high wage economy we are with a generous social welfare safety net.  
  
The key to all of this, of course, is that our education curriculum must equip
students with the skills to take advantage of these opportunities. This means
that we need to move beyond teaching students how to consume technology and
instead focus on the creation of technology.  
  
With the current rate of technology adoption in Australia, very few primary
school aged children, even at five or six, have not learnt the basics of how
to use their parents’ tablet or smartphone. So instead of teaching students
how to be passive consumers of technology or how to use Microsoft Word or
other proprietary software, our educators should be teaching students how to
create, how to code.  
  
As Barack Obama recently observed to young students in America: ‘Don’t just
download the latest app, help design it. Don’t just play on your phone,
program it’.  
  
The Australian curriculum review  
  
To this end, the first year of the Abbott Government has been a significant
one for Australia’s education policy. Christopher Pyne is working to make the
curriculum, particularly in the primary years, simpler and less crowded. Last
week he released the Government’s review of the Australian curriculum that in
many ways is all about getting back to basics - a curriculum that is less
cluttered and more balanced with a greater emphasis on literacy and numeracy.  
  
While the review has been met with broad support, specialists in the
technology sector have raised very real concerns that ICT has been overlooked.
The Australian Computer Society, for example, has warned that any delay to the
teaching of coding would put students at a significant disadvantage from their
peers in the UK, while others have compared the importance of coding to that
of literacy and numeracy.  
  
Now let me clarify a very important point: while I am certainly not suggesting
that the authors of the curriculum review, Dr Kevin Donnelly and Professor Ken
Wiltshire would agree with many that machine language and logic should be, for
primary school students, an essential enabling skill like literacy and
numeracy, neither have those authors suggested that important IT skills such
as coding could not be incorporated into other areas of the ‘back to basics’
primary school curriculum.  
  
Teaching students how to code - to use computers to create rather than just
consume - from Foundation through to Year 8 could be appropriately
incorporated into the mathematics syllabus, for example. A leader in this area
is the Australian Mathematics Trust based in Canberra. I commend you to the
work they are doing in informatics, a mathematics discipline, where students
learn the basic algorithms, data structures and computational techniques that
underlie information and communication, and demonstrate their learning through
computer programming tasks.  
  
It is also important to distinguish the recommendations of Phil Callil - the
subject matter specialist engaged to review the technologies curriculum - from
the review’s broader recommendations. Callil determined that key ICT skills
taught as part of the digital technologies syllabus, such as coding and
computational thinking, should be taught from Foundation to Year 10. I agree
with him and agree that machine languages and logic are and certainly will be
in the future almost as important as basic literacy and numeracy.  
  
Regardless as to whether the ICT or digital technologies syllabus - as it is
currently known - remains as a standalone subject or is incorporated into
another syllabus such as maths, we need to ensure that:  
  
The current situation - declining participation in ICT  
  
Australia’s Chief Scientist, Professor Ian Chubb made the point in his recent
paper, Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics: Australia’s Future,
that about half of all US economic growth in the last 50 years came from
scientific and technological advances.[9]  
  
But alarmingly in Australia, when it comes to ICT and STEM - the disciplines
that will equip Australians with the skills to replicate the American
experience - participation in the latter school years and at university
continues to decline.  
  
This is despite significant growth in employer demand, particularly from
outside the traditional ICT sector, for graduates with training in computer
science and related disciplines such as data and information management.  
  
Consider for a moment the example of the marketing industry, which is becoming
increasingly reliant on the use of data to better target products and
campaigns and to deliver genuine insights to customers. The leading marketing
firms are utilising the skills of data specialists to set themselves apart -
to extract and interpret meaningful trends from vast and complex volumes of
data.  
  
Of course, all of this is being underpinned by the increasing ubiquity of the
Internet - by the growth in mobile devices and other Internet-enabled
technologies such as sensor networks, but it nonetheless highlights the
growing demand for computer science graduates and data specialists,
particularly in industries outside the ICT sector.  
  
Of Australia’s 600,000 ICT workers, more than half now work outside the
traditional ICT sector, while both the McKinsey Global Institute and Gartner
predict that demand for data specialists will continue to grow strongly.
Gartner estimates that the demand for data specialists will reach more than 4
million jobs globally by 2015, with only a third of these positions likely to
be filled.  
  
This has created a troubling paradox. We now have a significant gap between
the technology-driven economy we have created and the skills that are not only
required to meet the current demand but also to drive future growth.  
  
The OECD has observed that the number of students enrolled in a mathematics
major in Australian universities fell by 15 per cent between 2001 and 2007,[3]
while the Trends in Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) found that
Australia’s performance in mathematics and science has stagnated over nearly
two decades.[4]  
  
Commencements in tertiary ICT courses have also fallen sharply, with a 53 per
cent decline between 2001 and 2011, while completions declined by 58 per cent
over the same period.[5]  
  
Compare this with China where 41 per cent of all degrees awarded by Chinese
institutions in 2011 were in a STEM subject.This is between two and three
times the proportion of STEM degrees awarded each year in countries such as
Australia, the UK and the US.[6]  
  
These low numbers of STEM and ICT skilled students and graduates are
frustrating industry who are concerned about the lack of sufficiently skilled
and qualified graduates able to start work in ICT-related jobs.  
  
Recently I spoke with Matt Barrie, Freelancer.com’s charismatic CEO, who
lamented the quantity and quality of Australia’s ICT graduates. He told me
that Freelancer was one of many Australian companies that are desperate for
Australian coders, engineers and computer scientists but regrettably often
have to employ workers from overseas as Australia’s tertiary sector is not
producing nearly enough graduates with the skills that enable them to start
work.  
  
What needs to be done to improve participation?  
  
To turn this trend around, we need to improve the pathways for students to
study IT from Foundation through to Year 12 and onto university. IT,
particularly coding and computational thinking, must be given a more prominent
position in the curriculum. As I have commented, this could be achieved
through the maths syllabus or as a stand alone subject, but regardless it is
important that we move beyond outdated discussions that focus on tech literacy
and instead expose primary school-aged children to tech creation through
coding.  
  
As a nation, we could probably do with fewer lawyers. But we absolutely need
more system engineers. We need more software developers. And we need more
people that not only have advanced skills in the use of proprietary software
such as Microsoft Excel, but also understand how computers work.  
  
Greater engagement with industry, such as through public-private partnerships
is another way that we can increase the number and quality of IT graduates.  
  
The Government’s recent announcement of trials based on the US P-TECH model is
a good step in this direction. P-TECH is an education pathways partnership
between IBM and the New York Education Department where students graduate with
an associate degree, along with the skills and knowledge they need to continue
their studies or transition directly into jobs in the IT industry.
Participating schools also pair students with corporate mentors who help guide
curricula and provide real-world insight into industry trends. Last week the
Prime Minister committed $500,000 to a P-TECH-style program in Geelong.
Public-private educational partnerships like this are providing students with
a recognised qualification, while helping to prepare them for a career in IT.  
  
We also need to monitor closely outcomes in the UK where last month the ICT
curriculum was replaced with a new computing curriculum. Unsurprisingly,
students as young as five and six are now receiving coding lessons.  
  
Back in January, Michael Gove, former UK Secretary of State for Education,
explained the changes by observing that:  
  
"ICT used to focus purely on computer literacy – teaching pupils, over and
over again, how to word-process, how to work a spreadsheet, how to use
programs already creaking into obsolescence; about as much use as teaching
children to send a telex or travel in a zeppelin.Our new curriculum teaches
children computer science, information technology and digital literacy:
teaching them how to code, and how to create their own programs; not just how
to work a computer, but how a computer works and how to make it work for
you".[19]  
  
I am pleased that as part of the Government’s Competitiveness Agenda, the
Coalition will invest $3.5 million through a ‘coding across the curriculum
programme’ to provide greater exposure to computer coding across different
year levels in Australian schools.  
  
Rethinking our approach to IT learning is key to addressing the skills
shortfall. Measures such as merging scientific and creative thinking at
primary school, or coding at primary school, lays important ground for
producing technology literate high school graduates - graduates trained to not
simply use technology, but to create, build and develop new technologies.  
  
Women in ICT  
  
The second change we have to make is to dramatically alter the composition of
those participating in STEM subjects and industries. In particular, we have to
increase the number of girls and women participating in ICT and STEM.  
  
Although women fill close to half of all jobs in Australia, they hold less
than 25% of STEM and ICT-related jobs.  
  
When I met with Sheryl Sandberg, Facebook's Chief Operating Officer, in
February she offered me a telling anecdote about the participation of girls in
STEM related subjects. Of 35 primary school kids at a weekend coding camp,
only five were girls. Of those five girls, Sandberg herself had enrolled two
of them (her niece and her niece's friend). According to Sandberg the
percentage of women and girls studying ICT subjects was declining and was now
lower than it was twenty years ago - whereas in most other disciplines and
professions the share of female graduates has continued to rise.  
  
The bottom line is that we need to encourage and expose women to the fantastic
opportunities created by studying and working in ICT. We need deliberate and
directed action focused on motivating women to pursue ICT subjects and careers
and promoting female role models in Computer Science who can tell their
stories about the positive social impact careers in computing can have.  
  
Conclusion  
  
Just as most students of mathematics will not become engineers or actuaries
and most students of English will never write a novel, so most children who
learn how to code at school will not become software developers.  
  
But the training in logic and the understanding of how machines think will
enable them better to engage in any and every course of life and career they
pursue.  
  
Our future, our prosperity depends on our being more innovative, more
competitive and we simply cannot do that unless we are as technically literate
as the other nations with which we compete.  
  
In a nutshell we need knowledge and imagination. The former on its own is a
dull resource, the latter on its own is a hallucination. Combined they will
ensure an Australian future which is more exciting, more prosperous than ever
before.  
  
[ends]  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
[1] Originally published in The Age, 8 Sept 2014. Available online at:
www.smh.com.au/it-pro/expertise/it-crowd-shrinking-as-vce-enrolments-
plummet-20140907-10dizx.html  
  
[2] As published in SMH Oct 7 2014 “20-year-slide in students taking maths in
final year”.  
  
[3] Australian Industry Group report Lifting Our Science, Technology,
Engineering and Maths (STEM) Skills report  
  
  
  
[4] Sue Thompson et al. Highlights from TIMSS and PIRLS 2011 from Australia’s
perspective, Australian Council for Educational Research, 2012 (quoted in AiG
report)  
  
[5] Australian Workforce and Productivity Agency, ICT Skills Forum
presentation, November 2012 (quoted in AiG Report)  
  
[6]
http://www.obhe.ac.uk/newsletters/borderless_report_january_2013/global_race_for_stem_skills  
  
[7] Beanland,D.; How Engineers Australia can support the transformation of
engineering education in Australian universities, 30,10,2012 (quoted in AiG
report)  
  
[8] Australia’s skills and workforce development needs, Discussion Paper,
Australian Workforce and Productivity Agency, July 2012 (as quoted in AiG
report)  
  
[9] Science, Technology, Engineering And Mathematics: Australia’s Future,
released by Australia’s Chief Scientist, Professor Ian Chubb on 2 September
2014: www.chiefscientist.gov.au/2014/09/professor-chubb-releases-science-
technology-engineering-and-mathematics-australias-future/ p.7  
  
[10] Ibid, p.7  
  
[11] Ibid, p.7  
  
[12] Ibid, p.7  
  
[13] The Role of Science, Research and Technology in Llifting Australia’s
Productivity, released by the Australian Council of Learned Academies, 3 June
2014. Available online at: www.acola.org.au/index.php/projects/securing-
australia-s-future/project-4 p.14  
  
[14] Australian Council of Learned Academies Media Release 3 June 2014:
www.acola.org.au/index.php/news/59-research-and-innovation-critical-to-future-
australian-industries-finds-new-acola-report  
  
[15] STEM: Country Comparisons, released by the Australian Council of Learned
Academies, 4 June 2014. Available online at:
http://www.acola.org.au/index.php/projects/securing-australia-s-
future/project-2 p.9  
  
[16] Australian Council of Learned Academies Media Release 4 June 2014:
www.acola.org.au/index.php/news/32-new-acola-report-international-comparison-
study-of-stem-education  
  
[17] Consultant Report - Securing Australia’s Future - STEM: Country
Comparisons [STEM Report – Republic of Korea], Australian Council of Learned
Academies, May 2013. Available online at: www.acola.org.au/index.php/stem-
consultants-reports  
  
[18] The Guardian, 4 Sept 2014. Available online at:
www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/04/coding-school-computing-children-
programming  
  
[19] The Guardian, 4 Sept 2014. Available online at:
www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/04/coding-school-computing-children-
programming